d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank  

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY  

Report No. 36014-YEM 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION  

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF YEMEN 

FOR THE PERIOD FY2006-FY2009  

May 17, 2006 

Country Department III  
Middle East and North Africa Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official Duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The date of the last Country Assistance Strategy was September 5, 2002 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
(Exchange Rate Effective as of May 17, 2006) 
Currency Unit = Yemeni Rials (YR) 
US$1   = YR 196.45 
  SDR 1  = US$1.49348 

FISCAL YEAR  
January 1 – December 31   

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS  

AAA 
APL 
CAE 

Analytical and Advisory Services 
Adaptable Program Lending 
Country Assistance Evaluation 

CPR 
DfID 

CASCR Country Assistance Strategy 
Completion Report 
CBY 
Central Bank of Yemen 
CFAA Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Report 
Country Policy and Institutional 
Assessment 
Country Performance Rating 
Department for International 
Development 
Economic and Sector Work 
European Union 
Global Environment Facility 
Gender Parity Index 
International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development 
International Development 
Association 
Independent Evaluation Group 
International Fund for Agricultural 
Development 
Islamic Development Bank 

ESW 
EU 
GEF 
GPI 
IBRD 

IEG 
IFAD 

IsDB 

CPAR 

CPIA 

IDA 

LNG 
Liquefied Natural Gas 
MDG 
Millennium Development Goal  
NWSSIP National Water Sector Strategic 
Investment Plan 
Public Electricity Corporation 

PEC 

PER 
PRSC 

Public Expenditure Review 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit 

PSD 

PWP 

SFD 
SME 

Private Sector Development 

Public Works Project 

Social Fund for Development 
Small and Medium Enterprise 

TA 
Technical Assistance 
UK 
United Kingdom 
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund 
UNDP 
United Nations Development 
Program 
United States 

US 

VAT 
WBI 

Value Added Tax 
World Bank Institute 

WHO 

World Health Organization 

Vice President:  
Director:  
Task Team Leader: 

Christiaan Poortman  
Emmanuel Mbi  
Gaiv Tata  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 1 - 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR 
THE REPUBLIC OF YEMEN 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................... i 
II. 
COUNTRY CONTEXT.......................................................................................... 1 
III. 
KEY CHALLENGES AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS .............................. 3 
A. Progress Towards Poverty Reduction and Social Development............................. 3 
B. Medium-Term Outlook ......................................................................................... 17 
IV. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY .................................................... 19 
A. Past Bank Assistance ............................................................................................ 19 
B. Government’s Development Program and the CAS ............................................. 22 
C. Development Partners ........................................................................................... 23 
D. CAS Design: Pillars, Outcomes and Instruments ................................................. 25 
E. Country Financing Parameters .............................................................................. 34 
F. Lending Scenarios ................................................................................................. 34 
G. Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation ........................................................... 34 
V. 
MANAGING RISKS ............................................................................................ 35 

Figures 
Figure 1:   Yemen’s Governance Indicators ....................................................................... 6 
Figure 2:   Ranking of Investment Climate Constraints ................................................... 10 

Tables 
Table 1:   Selected Macroeconomic Indicators ............................................................... 17 
Table 2:   Donor Partnerships.......................................................................................... 24 
Table 3:   Previous Lending Program and Impact on Country Development Goals....... 27 
Table 4:   New Lending Program and Impact on Country Development Goals ............. 29 
Table 5:   Economic and Sector Work and Impact on Country Development Goals ..... 31 
Table 6:   Proposed Technical Assistance and Implementation Support ........................ 31 

Boxes 
Box 1:   
Short-term National Agenda for Reform/Matrix of Good Governance 
 Measures ........................................................................................................... 8 
Box 2:   The Emerging Approach to Water .................................................................. 14 
Box 3:   Key Successes Under 2003-2005 Country Assistance Strategy .................... 21 
Box 4:   World Bank Support to Population Issues ..................................................... 26 
Box 5:   Learning from the 2003-2005 Country Assistance Strategy........................... 28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 2 - 

Annexes 
Annex 1: 
Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 
Annex 6: 
Annex 7: 
Annex A2: 
Annex B2: 
Annex B3: 
Annex B4: 
Annex B5: 
Annex B6: 
Annex B7: 
Annex B8: 
Annex B8: 

 CAS Results Chain 
 CAS Results Matrix 
 CAS Completion Report 
 CAS Consultations 
 CAS Instruments by Country Development Goals 
 Doing Business Indicators 
 Country Financing Parameters 
 Country at a Glance 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Proposed Lending Program  
Summary of Non-Lending Services 
Social Indicators 
 Key Economic Indicators 
 Key Exposure Indicators 
 Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA/Grants) 
Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio 

Map 

IBRD Map No. 33513 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This Country Assistance Strategy was prepared by a core team consisting of Torek Farhadi, Afef Haddad, 
Stephen Karam, Roseleen Mba-Kalu, Gail Richardson, Mustapha Rouis, T.G. Srinivasan, Gaiv Tata (Team 
Leader), Jean-Philippe Tre and Ayesha Vawda.  The Government CAS team was led by the Vice Minister of 
the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, Yahya Al-Mutawakel, included Abdullah Al-Shater, 
Mutahar Al-Abbasi, Hisham Sharaf, Mohammed Al- Haweri and Khaled Mohamed Saeed and was supported 
by Taha Al-Fusail and Mustafa Al-Khameri.  Government contribution was provided under the overall 
supervision of  H.E. Ahmed Sofan, ex-Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Planning and International 
Cooperation and H.E. Abdul Karim Al-Arhabi, Minister of Planning and International Cooperation.  
Significant contributions were provided by many members of the World Bank’s Country Team and officials 
from several Government ministries and agencies and are gratefully acknowledged.  Administrative support 
was provided by Maria Luisa de la Puente and Irene Sitienei. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- i - 

I. 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

i. Yemen represents the single largest development challenge in the Middle East: it is 
a country of deep rooted tradition endowed with limited resources notably scarce water, 
limited arable land and declining oil reserves; a country that has experienced dramatic 
internal and external shocks in the last two decades; the only low-income IDA country in 
a rich region; and a young country with nearly 50 percent of its population below 15 
years and population expected to double in the next 20 years.  Despite these constraints, 
Yemen developed a multi-party democratic system and a relatively free press ahead of 
other countries in the region.       

ii. After the civil war of 1994, Yemen undertook painful economic reforms and saw 
the benefits through a healthy growth in per capita incomes. With the slowdown in the 
reform process between 2000 and 2005, Yemen made limited economic and social 
progress over the period of implementing its first Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
(2003-2005).  This limited progress is also reflected in the Bank’s program under the 
previous two CASs being rated as moderately unsatisfactory by IEG.   External assistance 
in support of the Government’s program has been modest despite widespread recognition 
of assistance necessary to address the development-poverty-security nexus.  Initially, this 
resulted from perceptions that Yemen could finance its development from its oil 
resources. More recently, aid levels have been lower due to governance concerns as well 
as shifting donor priorities. 

iii. Beginning with the implementation of delayed economic reforms in July 2005, the 
situation has begun to slowly improve.  Two recent developments provide the first 
significant window of opportunity since the successful growth episode of 1995-1999.  
First, the Government has started implementing long delayed reforms and in particular is 
confronting the task of reforming Yemen’s governance systems; its success in doing so is 
crucial and must be both closely watched and supported by all development partners.  
Second, neighboring countries are offering Yemen the long-term prospect of regional 
integration and, during 
the 
transition period, funding 
to develop 
institutions, 
infrastructure and human capacities.  International experience has demonstrated that, in 
addition to the economic benefits of regional integration, the process of integration has 
often been an incentive for reform.   

iv. This Country Assistance Strategy proposes that the World Bank should help the 
Government to make progress on four pillars:  increasing non-oil growth; improving 
human development outcomes; improving fiscal sustainability; and addressing the 
resource sustainability crisis.   The CAS also includes, under each pillar, upfront actions 
to improve economic governance which need to be implemented immediately even 
though the outcomes may only be visible in the medium-term.   

v. Based on Yemen’s IDA allocation, the World Bank will contribute - to Yemen’s 
development process - a modest financial amount of around US$400 million in IDA 
credits over the four year CAS period.  Given the enormous development needs of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
- ii - 

Yemen, IDA disbursements will remain modest and annually contribute less than 7.5 
percent of development expenditures.  The World Bank’s larger contribution will 
therefore have to come from: a catalytic role in encouraging other donors to assist 
Yemen; providing technical assistance to the Government and working with other donors 
to define sector and thematic strategies and improve delivery mechanisms; helping in 
improving core Government systems; and exceptionally, using projects to demonstrate 
new implementation approaches that, if successful, can be mainstreamed by the 
Government and other development partners.  This focus will be consistent with 
approaches that led to the few successes under the previous CAS. 

vi. The risks to the program will be significant and will encompass: development 
effectiveness; fiduciary management, macro economic and debt sustainability; realizing 
reform payoffs; and regional/internal security issues.  These risks will be closely 
monitored and are being mitigated, wherever feasible.  The Bank will remain closely 
engaged recognizing that, despite the high risks, there is also the potential for high reward 
to its assistance. 

vii. The following issues are suggested for the consideration of the Board. 
• Does the CAS design sufficiently incorporate the lessons learned from the 
implementation of the previous CAS?  
Is the focus on assisting Government to meet short- to medium-term crises 
appropriate?  
• Does the CAS program realistically reflect the results that can be obtained from a 
modest lending program and somewhat higher levels of non-lending assistance?  

• 

 
 
 
 
- 1 - 

II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT 

1. 
The Republic of Yemen was formed in 1990 by the unification of North and South 
Yemen.  Yemen has a multi-party democratic system; two Parliamentary elections were 
held in the 1990s and the most recent Parliamentary elections were held in 2003.  The 
current presidential system is based on direct elections and the current president was re-
elected through  a direct presidential election in 1999.  The next presidential election will 
be held in September 2006.   There is a relatively free press in Yemen. 

2. 
Since unification, Yemen has coped with several shocks.  At the time of the first 
Gulf war, the country coped with the return of around 800,000 Yemenis working in the 
Gulf countries and a temporary suspension of most foreign aid.  Subsequently, it 
overcame a civil war in 1994.   Yemen has experienced other internal security problems 
(e.g. terrorist attacks on the USS Cole in 2000 and the French tanker Limburg in 2002 
and more recently conflict in the Sada’a governorate in 2005).  Yemen is considered a 
Fragile State i.e. it is among a group of countries whose: policies and institutions are 
weak making them vulnerable in their capacity to deliver services to citizens, control 
corruption or provide for sufficient voice and accountability; and there are risks of 
conflict and political instability.  Within the typology of Fragile States, Yemen exhibits 
most of the characteristics of a gradual reformer.1 

3. 
Poverty is a nation-wide phenomenon with an estimated 42 percent of the 
population of 19.2 million (in 2004) living in poverty with a higher concentration in rural 
areas (where 73 percent of Yemenis live).2   For nearly a decade after unification, Yemen 
achieved a reasonable annual GDP growth rate (5.2 percent), securing a decent 2 percent 
per-capita growth.  Several factors helped in achieving growth in this period, such as the 
increased market resulting from the integration of North and South Yemen, an eighty 
percent increase in oil production as new oil wells came on stream in 1994, steady 
decline in internal conflicts after the end of the 1994 civil war and a successful 
macroeconomic stabilization and reform program in the second half of the 1990s with the 
support of the international community.  The reform program focused on inflation 
control, price and trade liberalization, reduction in subsides, unification of the exchange 
rate regime and financial sector reforms. All of these reform efforts were successful and 
private investment and growth responded well. The period 1995 to 1999 stands out 
clearly as a peak period of growth in post-unification Yemen. 

4. 
Since 2000 GDP growth has steadily begun to slip as the Government became 
distracted from maintaining the momentum of reforms.  First, pressures for fiscal 

1 Yemen is among the initial group of countries where the OECD Principles for Good International 
Engagement in Fragile States are being piloted.  The World Bank identifies Fragile States by weak 
performance (below 3.0) on the Country Policy and Institutional Analysis and as marginal Fragile States (if 
the CPIA is below 3.2). Using only CPIA benchmarks, Yemen would not be classified as a Fragile State as 
its CPIA rating is slightly above the marginal level.  The typology of Fragile States consists of countries: in 
deterioration; prolonged crisis or impasses; post-conflict or political transition; and in gradual 
improvement.  See Fragile States – Good Practice in Country Assistance Strategies, The World Bank, 2005. 
2 Yemen Poverty Update, The World Bank, 2002.   Poverty estimates based on 1998 Household Budget 
Survey.     

 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 2 - 

prudence lessened as revenues increased significantly from the dramatic increases in oil 
prices since 2000.   Second, security concerns began to dominate both in Yemen and in 
the region after the September 11 events. Over this period, quality of governance also 
remained weak. Several reform initiatives floundered: the privatization process stalled, 
introduction of a General Sales Tax and the reduction in petroleum subsidies were 
repeatedly shelved, political commitment for legal and judicial reforms wavered, and the 
implementation of civil service modernization and health sector reforms slowed. Private 
investment slumped in 1999 and continued to fall steadily to reach a mere 10 percent of 
GDP, halving from the average during the period of reforms. 

5. Yemen ranks 151st out of 177 countries on the 2005 Human Development Index.  
There has been an increase in average life expectancy (up from 41.6 years in 1970 to 63 
in 2003) with women’s life expectancy mirroring the overall trends.  Similarly, there has 
been a significant increase in enrollment rates in basic education (up from 3 million in 
1996 to 4.1 million in 2004).  However, there are many remaining areas of concern 
including: high fertility rates (population growing at over 0.5 million people per annum); 
infant and child mortality; maternal mortality; malnutrition (18 percent of the population 
or about 3 million people) particularly for children under 5; and low female literacy rates 
which stood at 28.5 percent in 2002.  Hence, significant challenges remain despite 
achievements over the last three decades.   

 
 
- 3 - 

III. KEY CHALLENGES AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS 

A. Progress Towards Poverty Reduction and Social Development 

6. Yemen’s long-term vision3 is focused on achieving social and development 
progress.  Medium-term measures for progress in the Government’s First Poverty 
Reduction Strategy (2003-2005)4 are based on the Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs).5   In support of these goals, the First PRSP was designed around five major 
pillars: achieving economic growth; developing human 
resources; 
improving 
infrastructure; granting social protection; and enhancing governance and participation.   
The Government’s First PRSP Progress Report (for 2003 and 2004) acknowledges that 
only limited progress was made towards achieving the long-term development goals.  
The main goal of reducing the percentage of the poor by 13 percent is not likely to have 
been met.  There have been some successes in meeting targets for:  basic education 
enrollment (for both boys and girls), road rehabilitation and maintenance, power supply 
and expanded coverage for social protection.  Missed targets include: GDP growth, 
mortality indicators for infants, children and mothers, and access to water and electricity. 
As the main reasons for the weak performance, the APR identified: dampened investor 
interest in the region following the second Iraq war; internal security concerns; and a 
slowdown in economic reforms. 

7. 
  The May 2006 Bank/IMF Joint Staff Assessment of the PRSP progress report 
concurs that the very slow pace of structural reforms was the main cause of the poor 
progress under the PRSP.  This report and the 2004 Country Policy and Institutional 
Assessment (CPIA) also identify insufficient action in public sector management and 
governance as impediments to growth.   

8. As described in the paragraphs below, progress in achieving the MDGs has been 
limited and based on current trends, Yemen is unlikely to achieve the MDGs by 2015, 
with the possible exception of achieving universal primary education.6  

Poverty Reduction 

9. 
The last Household Budget Survey was undertaken in Yemen in 1998.  The detailed 
analysis of the 1998 HBS data was undertaken in a 2002 Poverty Update which estimated 
that 42 percent of households were poor based on a lower poverty line (i.e. food and non-
food expenditures of Rials 3,210 per person per month) which corresponded - based on 
the prevailing exchange rate at the time - to a US$0.80 per day poverty line.  The major 
determinants of poverty were in line with other countries and showed that poverty status 

3  Yemen  Vision 2025, 2002.   
4 The PRSP also overlapped with the 2nd Five Year Development Plan (2001-2005).  
5 The MDG focus is expected to continue in the Second PRSP as Yemen is one of the pilot countries under 
the UN Millennium Project and considerable support has been provided by the UN system to the analysis 
and formulation of goals under the Second PRSP. 
6 The assessment is based on emerging data from the new census which suggests that enrolment rates may 
be higher than previously estimated; this assessment will be confirmed at the next Joint Donor Education 
Review. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 4 - 

was negatively influenced by:  larger size of the household; larger number of dependents 
per household; younger age of the head of household; lower education attainment; 
employment status of the head of household; lower remittances; and particular 
geographical locations (which were considered a proxy for poor infrastructure).   

10. Additional poverty analysis since that time has been based on partial analysis; 
poverty is assumed to have remained stagnant or decreased only slightly since the last 
survey.  Work on a new Household Budget Survey commenced in July 2005 (after the 
completion of the 2004 Census) and the full year survey process will be completed by 
June 2006.  A full update of the poverty situation is, hence, expected in 2007 and its 
findings would be presented in the 2008 CAS Progress Report.    

Macro-Economic Context 

11. Fiscal revenues (38 percent of GDP) are heavily dependent on oil (which 
contributes about three-quarters of revenues).  As the oil sector generates few jobs, the 
primary mechanism for transferring the benefits from oil revenues to the population are 
through: public transfers; public services and public investments.  While safety net 
transfers are limited, fuel is being sold domestically below international prices and 
subsidies are now costing 10 percent of GDP.  These subsidies, which are poorly targeted 
are as large as development expenditures and reduce the resources available for achieving 
the MDGs as well as for investing in infrastructure and public services necessary for 
supporting growth.  With total Government expenditures at 40 percent of GDP, the 
primary fiscal account is nearly in balance.  External balances are heavily dependent on 
oil; out of merchandise exports of US$ 6.6 billion in 2005, oil contributed US$5.8 billion.  
Imports stood at US$4.5 billion.  At end-December 2005, foreign reserves stood at 
US$5.4 billion with the Central Bank of Yemen’s holdings accounting for over 9.4 
months of import equivalent.7   

12. 
In July 2005, the Government re-launched its macro-economic reform program.  
Prices of fuel products (diesel, gasoline, kerosene and Liquefied Petroleum Gas) were 
almost doubled reducing the overall fuel subsidy by 29 percent (estimated at world prices 
at the time). Unfortunately, the fuel price increase led to three days of rioting throughout 
the country, loss of life and property damage.  The introduction of VAT at a 10 per cent 
rate was deferred to January 1, 2007 but was introduced at an interim rate of 5 per cent 
for local production and 8 percent for imported goods.  Similarly, a new Customs Law 
was passed.  

13. 
In addition to the ongoing challenges of managing the budget’s heavy dependency 
on oil, an additional challenge would arise as projections indicate that the oil production 
will decline and barring the discovery of major new oil reserves, Yemen could become a 
net oil importer by 2011.  This may result in oil revenues reducing over the next decade 
and affecting the state’s ability to finance the current social compact.  The key 
implications of this challenge for the fiscal situation; external balances; and public 
indebtedness are discussed further in Section B on the medium-term outlook.    

7 The other major contributor was workers remittances which amounted to US$1.1 billion. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 5 - 

14. Public Financial Management.  The Yemen Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment (CFAA) identified serious weaknesses in the areas of:  internal controls; 
internal and external audit; accounting and reporting; and financial and audit capacity.   
In addition to specific public sector issues, there is an overall context in which accounting 
and auditing practices in Yemen inadequately adhere to International Accounting 
Standards (IAS); and International Standards on Auditing (ISA).   There is both a need 
for improved accounting education and training and a focus on professional ethics.  In 
August 2005, the Cabinet approved a Ten Year Public Financial Management reform 
strategy to address these weaknesses including reforms and capacity building to increase 
the efficiency in managing public finances.  The successful implementation of these 
measures would also improve fiduciary risk ratings in future assessments. The 
Government followed this up by preparing a detailed Action Plan to implement this 
strategy.  It is currently finalizing the detailed financing arrangements with interested 
donors in the context of a Partnership Agreement. The development of a computerized 
system to institutionalize those reforms in key ministries is also proceeding and should be 
operational by FY 2008.  Further efforts to strengthen the accounting and auditing 
profession will be needed to complement the PFM program; this would also have 
beneficial spillovers in improving the investment climate as well as strengthening 
fiduciary reporting on Bank projects.   

Governance and Public Sector Management 

15. Good governance is a central element of the development process.  Like in many 
developing countries, the Government has commenced the move to a system based on 
rule of law and predictable funding of local authorities based on legally defined 
responsibilities.  This transition holds the promise of reducing opportunities for 
corruption and poor governance but it will be challenging to the status quo as it could 
impact on the role of “Shaykhs” who are community leaders playing an important role for 
the Government in conflict resolution and mobilizing local communities;8  and similarly, 
affect consensus building which is often achieved through a process of negotiation where 
allegiance is accorded to the state in exchange for benefits.9  Progress in governance is 
currently assessed on three broad dimensions: voice, accountability and political stability; 
government effectiveness, regulatory burden and rule of law; and control of corruption. 
Yemen ranks in the lowest 25th percentile on all areas in 2004 as shown in Figure 1.  10 

8 Draft Country Social Analysis, The World Bank 2006 
9 Yemen: Democracy and Governance Assessment, ARD Inc, February 2004 
10  D. Kaufmann, A. Kraay and M. Mastruzzi, 2005 - Governance Matters IV: Governance Indicators for 
1996-2004 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 6 - 

Figure 1:  YEMEN’S GOVERNANCE INDICATORS 

16. Decentralization.  A 2000 Local Authority Law mandated decentralization to 
elected councils at governorate and district levels; local council elections were held for 
the first time in 2001 and are giving greater voice to citizens, especially those living in 
rural areas.  By the end of 2005, there are local accountant offices at governorate and 
district levels and the local budgets for 2005 were prepared fully and directly by local 
authorities. The pace of implementation of the fiscal decentralization process has been 
slow and local governments have limited resources over which they have discretion.  In 
order to make progress the Government would need to further explore revenue and 
expenditure assignments within the intergovernmental fiscal system.     

17. Public Sector Reform.  Government effectiveness indicators (which measure the 
competence of the bureaucracy and the quality of public service delivery) have remained 
low reflecting growing impatience of the public over the state of public administration.   
The Public Administration workforce is large (at 725,000 persons including civil 
servants, security forces and other employees)) and underpaid but the large wage bill (at 
about 13 percent of GDP) has meant substantially increasing pay scales would not be 
fiscally affordable without an effective Human Resource policy.  After an initial 
implementation delay, there has been some progress recently.  In July 2005, a 
comprehensive wage reform strategy was approved by Parliament and implementation 
has begun: most allowances were merged into a basic salary; around 60,000 individuals 
receiving salaries inconsistent with their jobs and qualifications were removed from the 
payroll; minimum salary levels were increased to slightly above the poverty line; and 
wage increases were provided only to those civil servants who have been confirmed not 
to be ghost workers.  Work is well advanced on a civil servant identification system 
(utilizing biometric identification methods) which is expected to become operational in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 7 - 

the second quarter of 2006 and thereafter result in further reduction of ghosts and double 
dippers.  This has been complemented by sector reform activities; for example, a Cabinet 
approved regulation to tie teaching posts to the school rather than to the individual 
teacher (234,000 members of the civil service in 2004) should address a significant 
bottleneck to the delivery of quality education services in the rural areas.   

18. Regulatory Reform.  Low percentile rankings of regulatory burden indicators 
(which measure the incidence of market-unfriendly policies) and the rule of law 
indicators (which measure the quality of contract enforcement, the police, and the courts, 
as well as the likelihood of crime and violence) are confirmed by recent country sector 
work (the Investment Climate Assessment) which points to administrative burden and 
discretion in implementing regulation and taxation as among the top constraints to private 
sector development as has been noted in paragraph  23. 

19. Anti-Corruption.  Finally, Yemen has seen a deterioration in control of corruption 
indicators. Transparency International’s corruption perception index declined from 2.6 in 
2003 to 2.4 in 2004 before recovering to 2.7 in 2005 when Yemen was ranked 103rd out 
of 159 countries. Clearly, the problems with administrative discretion described in 
paragraph  18 have a direct impact on corruption but grand corruption is also perceived to 
cause a major drain on public resources.  In addition, weak Government procurement and 
financial management systems (as noted in the Country Procurement Assessment Review 
and Country Financial Accountability Assessment) also contribute to administrative 
corruption.   

20. Commencing 
the Implementation of Good Governance Measures. 
 The 
Government has begun to implement several delayed reforms over the past year including 
macro-economic reforms (paragraph  12); public financial management (paragraph  0); 
and public sector reform (paragraph  17). Finally, in January 2006, the Government has 
proposed a comprehensive governance reform agenda through a Cabinet approved 
National Agenda For Reform/Matrix of Good Governance Measures including: 
introducing an anti-corruption legislative framework consistent with commitments made 
under the UN Convention Against Corruption; joining the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative; increasing transparency in public procurement and financial 
management; and ensuring greater independence of the judiciary and the supreme audit 
institution from the executive branch.  This National Agenda for Reform has become a 
central focus of a new Cabinet appointed in February 2006 which is closely monitoring 
its implementation (see Box 1). 

 
 
 
- 8 - 

Box 1: Short-Term National Agenda for Reform/Matrix of Good Governance Measures 

In January 2006, the Government adopted and commenced implementing its National Agenda 
for Reform which includes concrete actions in twenty focal areas including: 
• Anti-Corruption.  Laws on Anti-Corruption and Financial Disclosure to reduce conflict of 
interest and put in force commitments included in the UN Convention Against Corruption; 
National Corruption Record; and confidential reporting mechanism and protection for 
whistleblowers.   
• Revenue Transparency.  Join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) 
which supports improved governance in resource-rich countries through the full publication 
and verification of company payments and government revenues from oil, gas and mining.  
Studies have shown that when governance is good, such revenues can foster economic 
growth and reduce poverty.  
• Procurement reform.  Cabinet approval of National Procurement Manual and Standard 
Bidding documents (completed); establishment of a tracking system to monitor all public 
procurement; invitation of international experts and local external observers to participate as 
observers in the High Tender Board; and amendment of the Public Tenders Law to better 
define the role of the HTB, require disclosure of public procurement information, mandate 
disclosure of income and assets of individuals with public procurement roles, require 
disclosure from bidders of close relationships with decision-makers in public procurement.  
• Public Financial Management.  Implement the Public Financial Management Strategy; 
amend the law of the external audit entity to ensure its independence from the Executive 
Branch and establish mechanisms for its reports to be published; and expedite Parliamentary 
approval of Public Debt Management Bill (completed). 
• Civil Service Reform.  Prepare an Action Plan to implement the Civil Service Reform 
strategy and publish guides for government services and fees. 
• Private Sector Development.  Revise laws and regulations to reduce cost and time required 
to establish a new business and prepare a comprehensive report of all changes required to 
improve government services provided to applicants for new businesses; reduce time taken 
for customs clearance and inspection procedures from 8 to 4 days; review and amend tax 
code to be in conformity with international norms; develop information system to automate 
transactions of the Tax and Customs Authority; and require the Central Bank to enforce 
compliance with Basel prudential guidelines. 
Judiciary.  Amend the law of Judicial Authority to ensure:  separation of powers from the 
executive and ensure administrative and financial autonomy of the justice system and 
develop and implement an action plan to improve court performance. 
• Press.  Complete the preparation of a new draft Press Law aimed at protecting rights and 
public liberties and take actions against those who harass or abuse journalists. 
• Law and Order.  Passage of Regulation of Weapons Possession Bill through Parliament. 

• 

 
 
 
- 9 - 

Growth 

21. Yemen’s economy is dominated by oil (estimated at 27 percent of GDP and 90 
percent of merchandise exports).  Other economic activities in Yemen consist of services 
(38 percent of GDP); agriculture (15 percent); manufacturing, utilities and construction 
(10 percent); and Government services (10 percent).11   While the oil sector makes a 
substantial contribution to GDP it generates few jobs (21,000 jobs).  The burden of job 
creation is, hence, on the agriculture (including fisheries), manufacturing and service 
sectors. Official unemployment figures (at 11.3 percent) are high and actual 
unemployment rates are likely to be even higher. With low domestic demand, there are 
additional challenges in developing an internationally competitive export sector given the 
“Dutch disease” effects of oil exports on the exchange rate.   

22. 
In the 1990s, GDP growth in Yemen has been driven mainly by factor accumulation 
rather than productivity growth which was negative for most of the decade.12   Even this 
accumulation is at risk as private sector investment in Yemen is declining - falling from 
20 percent of GDP in 1997 to 13 percent by 2004.   

23. Private Sector Development.  Yemen has been a difficult place for doing business; 
it ranked as 90th out of 155 countries in the overall ease of doing business but ranked as 
151st on the ease of starting a business.13  The top investment climate constraints reported 
by domestic firms are shown in Figure 2.14   Specifically, 
• Macro-economic 
instability, 
tax 
rates, corruption, 
tax administration, anti- 
competitive or informal practices and smuggling or dumping.   
• There is another set of constraints - less significant than the top ranked constraints – 
but still identified as a problem by over a third to half of all firms surveyed: power, 
customs regulation, land and access to finance.  Some of these constraints get a higher 
ranking by firms of different sizes or firms in particular locations.15  

24. Agriculture.  Agricultural activities are conducted in four agro-ecological zones; 
the majority of cultivated land is in the highlands and plateaus and a majority of 
agricultural households own livestock.  Qat which is the major cash crop, represents only 
15 percent of cultivated land but generates around a third of agricultural GDP; production 
increased over the past decade though profits have accrued primarily to larger farmers.16  
About half of the cultivated land is under irrigation (spate, tube wells or spring) and the 
other half is under rainfed agriculture.  There have been improvements in spate irrigation 
to better manage surface water but groundwater continues to be extracted at unsustainable 

11 2005 estimates in Government PRSP Progress Report Table 3. 
12 Economic Growth in the Republic of Yemen: Sources, Constraints, and Potentials; World Bank, 2002. 
13 Doing Business 2006, The World Bank, 2005.   
14 Draft Investment Climate Assessment, 2006.  While the rankings are based on a survey of 488 formal 
firms in manufacturing, services and commerce in four locations, many of these constraints are also likely 
to affect firms of all sizes and rural enterprises and farms as well. 
15 Land access is a significant problem for small firms; access and cost of finance for medium-sized firms; 
and worker skills and education for large firms.  Electricity is a concern for firms in Al-Hodeida, access to 
land in Aden; “anti-competitive or informal practices” and “smuggling and dumping” in Taiz. 
16 See draft Country Social Analysis, 2006. 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 10 - 

levels in part due to subsidized diesel prices.  Agriculture (including fisheries) contributes 
15 percent to GDP but provides employment for 55 percent of the active population; the 
discrepancy reflects seasonal employment, underemployment and low productivity.  Low 
productivity results from: low yielding seed varieties; water shortages, problems with 
access to inputs and outputs (due to poor road infrastructure and institutions); post-
harvest losses; and lack of quality assurance services, particularly for exports.   

Figure 2:  RANKING OF INVESTMENT CLIMATE CONSTRAINTS  

Leading Constraints:  Yemeni Enterprises

73

71

61

54
54

52

47

M acroeconomic Uncertainty

Tax rates

Corrupt ion 

Tax administrat ion

Ant icompet it ive or informal pract ice

Smuggling or dumping

Electricity

Customs & trade regulat ions

Access to land 

Cost of f inancing

Legal system/ conf lict resolut ion

Regulatory policy uncertainty
Access to f inance ( co llateral)

Crime, theft & disorder

Business licensing/ operat ing permits

Skills/ educat ion of workers 

Transportat ion

Labor regulat ions

40

37

34

31
31

28
28

24

23

15

12

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Percent of respondents evaluating constraints as "major" or "very severe"

25. Fisheries.  With a coastline of 2,230 km, Yemen has a wealth of fisheries 
resources.   Previously, Yemen allowed uncontrolled expansion of large foreign fisheries 
fleets in Yemeni waters which carried the risk of over-fishing and resulted in fish exports 
of only US$13 million.   The Government has since discontinued the issuance of foreign 
fishing agreements.  This has led to the fisheries sector becoming the most important 
source of non-oil export revenues (US$210 million in 2004).    There is further potential 
to tap lucrative markets in Europe and elsewhere for fresh fish which conform to strict 
quality standards.  The main constraints include: lack of planning information, research 
and fisheries management plans; lack of infrastructure; and institutional capacity.    

26. Urban Growth.  Yemen has the highest rate of urban growth in one of the fastest 
urbanizing regions (7 percent per annum).  This has outstripped city capacity to provide 
services, resulting in a mushrooming of informal settlements and urban slums where 
residents lack tenure security and access to reliable and affordable infrastructure 
services.17   The Government is focusing on three major port cities (Aden, Al-Hodeidah 
and Al-Mukallah) to attract investment and stimulate economic growth.  Formulation of 
city development strategies (including updating of physical and investment planning) is 
well underway and with small seed investments already made in Aden, there has been an 

17 It is estimated that well over 10 percent of the housing stock in Taiz City is informal, while an estimated 
65 percent is not legally registered and the cost of median housing to median income is in the range of 75:1. 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 11 - 

encouraging response by the private sector with investments (including FDI) approaching 
US$85 million in 2005 alone.  The remaining challenges are: to replicate this approach in 
other cities; and to accelerate the private sector provision of infrastructure through 
enclaved industrial or export processing zones.  In order to increase exports, it may also 
be necessary to complement this with addressing specific administrative and institutional 
constraints. 18 

27. Natural Gas.  Yemen has significant gas reserves (proven reserves of 17 trillion 
cubic feet).  Currently, natural gas plays a small role in Yemen’s economy; most gas 
extracted with oil is re-injected.  Production sharing contracts in Yemen have given no 
property rights over gas to the private sector which is not unusual in a country where 
there is no gas market or ability for export.  There is significant potential for additional 
GDP, foreign exchange and Government revenues from the development of gas in the 
medium-term.  Long-term contracts (25 years) have already been entered into for 
extraction and export of two-third of these reserves.  Construction of a Liquefied Natural 
Gas (LNG) plant, associated pipeline and other facilities will cost $3.7 billion.  Once 
exports commence – currently projected for 2009 - the gross annual value is estimated at 
around US$1.5 billion (in 2005 prices) or around one-fourth of crude oil exports.  Net 
benefits would be lower as costs of development, transport, and liquefaction would need 
to be deducted but actual numbers have not yet been estimated.  Further, given that the 
export of Liquified Natural Gas is likely to commence in the foreseeable future, the 
central issue for Government is to give the private sector appropriate incentives to 
explore, produce and utilize gas (including for power generation). 

28. Financial Sector.  The financial system in Yemen is underdeveloped and plays a 
limited role in the economy despite the adoption of a number of reform measures during 
the last decade. The predominant institutions in the system are the Central Bank of 
Yemen (CBY), fifteen commercial banks (two government, four foreign, and nine 
domestic private banks) and two public sector specialized banks.  The four largest banks 
hold 65 percent of total banking system assets and branches are primarily in Sana’a and 
other large cities.   Nonperforming loans are estimated at a quarter of total loans and there 
are concerns regarding adequate provisioning.  Significant progress has been made in 
banking regulation and supervision, but much still remains to be done in enforcing the 
new prudential rules.  While access to finance is currently extremely limited in Yemen, 
international evidence indicates that financial sector reforms are needed for growth and 
poverty reduction and also needed to reduce the frequency and cost of financial crises 
which require costly bailouts by Governments.    

Human Development 

29. Education.    The focus has thus far been on improving access to basic education.  
In 2004, gross enrollment in basic education had increased to 4.1 million children (or 
76.4 percent). Gains in other sub-sectors were equally significant: between 1996 and 
2004, access to secondary and tertiary education improved by more than 80 percent. This 

18 Mitsubishi Research Institute: “Enhancing Yemen Export Competitiveness: Diagnosis and Policy 
Options”, 2005 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 12 - 

significant growth in access has been complemented with improvements in gender equity. 
Although low by international standards, the gender parity index (GPI) has improved 
substantially.  Nevertheless, sustained focus is required on reaching those who are most 
likely to stay out-of-school or dropout before completing basis education.  Yemen also 
faces challenges in improving the quality of learning and will benchmark the 
performance of its 4th and 8th grade students internationally by participating in the 
Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study in 2007.  In post-compulsory 
education - secondary, vocational/technical, and higher education - the government is 
confronting the challenges of improving the relevance of curricula to changing labor 
market and social needs, and increasing the efficiency of public expenditure. The strategy 
for TVET focuses on increasing the participation of employers in program design and 
delivery. The strategy for secondary education would address the need to increase access 
for girls and develop more diverse, relevant and cost effective curriculum options.  In the 
higher education sector, work is ongoing to finalize a national strategy that focuses 
attention to a leaner and more cost-efficient higher education system.  

30. Health.  The health status of the Yemeni population is poor as measured by all 
conventional indicators and Yemen is not on track to achieve health-related MDGs. Life 
expectancy (at birth) is only 63 years, while maternal mortality (365 per 100,000 live 
births), infant mortality (80 per 1000 live births), and under-five mortality (113 per 1000 
live births) are among the highest in the region. Outcomes in rural areas are much worse 
than urban areas.  With 64 percent of all health expenditures being private and 36 percent 
from public sources, Yemen has one of the lowest financial risk protection rates.  Further, 
at 1.4 percent of GDP, absolute levels of public expenditures are also low in comparison 
with countries of similar income levels.    

31. Nutrition.  Malnutrition is widespread in Yemen, reflecting the high rates of 
poverty found in both rural and urban areas. Among children under five years, 46 percent 
are underweight while 52 percent are stunted (short for their age); these rates are even 
higher among the poorest population quintiles.  Vitamin and mineral deficiencies are also 
widespread, resulting in an estimated loss of 1.3 percent of GDP. 

32. The health sector in Yemen suffers from a number of serious challenges: 
inequitable and inadequate access to services; poor quality of services (in both the public 
and private sectors) due to a lack of essential drugs, poor facilities (many without water 
and sanitation), inadequate equipment, insufficient and inadequately trained staff, and 
high absentee rates among public employees. The 2000 Health Sector Reform has gone 
largely un-implemented, in part due to changes in the top management of the 
implementing Ministry.  However, following the signing of a donor harmonization 
agreement in December 2005, the Government, with support from the development 
partners, has launched a major health sector review with the aim to revise the existing 
strategy for reform by September 2006. 

33. Social Protection.  Vulnerability in Yemen exists at individual, community and 
institutional levels. Since poverty is widespread, the social protection system is important 
for many households.  Public and private transfers (including zakat, pensions, local and 

 
 
 
 
- 13 - 

foreign remittances and government programs) provide substantial source of livelihood 
for the poor and they account for about 8 percent of total expenditures of the average 
Yemeni household.  However, there are no comprehensive risk-reducing mechanisms 
(such as labor market policies and programs).  Most of the existing public mechanisms 
have limited coverage, are not well targeted (with the exception of the Social Fund for 
Development and the Public Works Project) and are inefficient in terms of providing 
adequate protection for those in need.  The Government is planning to undertake a 
comprehensive review of the social protection sector including existing cash benefits, 
pension schemes and other programs and plans to formulate its Social Protection Strategy 
outlining the main directions for sector reforms.  

34. 
 Children and Youth.  Children and youth make up 76 percent of the total 
population, and the incidence of poverty among children is 21 percent higher than the 
adults.  Around 60 percent of the children and youth in Yemen suffer from poor health 
and educational outcomes.   The government recently endorsed a National Strategy for 
Children and Youth that provides a comprehensive and multi-sectoral framework to 
address risks that children and youth face along the life cycle stages, their consequence 
on subsequent years and their implications for reducing poverty and reaching the MDGs.  
This strategic framework is being incorporated into the Second PRSP and will also be 
used by line ministries to incorporate children and youth issues into sectoral strategies.   

Environmental Sustainability 

35. Water.  Water scarcity in Yemen is serious and getting worse; per capita 
availability of water in Yemen is at 2 percent of world and 10 percent of regional 
averages.   Groundwater extraction has reached 130% of recharge with agriculture using  
about 90 percent of the groundwater and within that, qat has become a major source of 
water depletion.  The consequent drop in aquifer levels has increased extraction costs.  
Urban and rural water supply and sanitation coverage are not keeping pace with the 
growth of the population.  Yemen’s challenge is, hence, to better manage groundwater 
resources and slow depletion while simultaneously increasing access to water (and 
sanitation) services for both agricultural and potable uses for an under-served population.  
Realizing the challenges facing the water sector, the government’s 2004 National Water 
Sector Strategic Investment Plan (NWSSIP) and the World Bank’s supporting 2005 
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy have focused on groundwater management 
as a central challenge.  This new approach is described in Box 2. 

36. Population.  Despite a 25 percent decline in the total fertility rate between 1960 and 
2003, total fertility remains among the highest in the world. With 6.2 births per woman 
(down from 7.2 in 1993), corresponding to a growth rate of 3.0 percent, Yemen’s 
population is increasing by over 500,000 persons per year and is expected to double to 40 
million by 2030. The causes of the persistently high fertility rates are myriad and 
complex. Among the most important are: low, but increasing, utilization rates of modern 
contraceptives (from 1 percent in 1979 to 23 percent in 2003); the cost of contraceptives; 
early age of first marriage; high infant mortality; high illiteracy rates among women; a 
preference for large families; and opposition to contraceptives among men, whose 

 
 
 
 
- 14 - 

approval is needed for use by  women. In addition, poor access, particularly in rural 
areas, to health care and family planning services is another important factor, which 
contributes not only to the low rates of breast feeding, but also to an estimated unmet 
need for family planning of 51 percent (in 2003; up from 39 percent in 1997).19  While 
Yemen has a National Population Strategy, which is supported extensively by a number 
of development partners, population growth remains a serious challenge. 

Box 2:  The Emerging Approach to Water 

The development of water resources and services has played an important part in driving Yemen’s growth over the 
last thirty years. As problems with high levels of groundwater extraction and urban and rural water supply and 
sanitation began to accelerate by the late 1990s, Government and donors were spurred to change. The National 
Water Resources Authority (NWRA) was created;  projects to improve irrigation efficiency were implemented and 
autonomous urban water utilities introduced.  In 2003, Government passed a water law, reorganized the sector 
under a single Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE), and began an integrated approach to basin 
management. 

In 2004, Government formulated the National Water Sector Strategy and Investment Program (NWSSIP) with 
Yemeni and donor stakeholders as an integrated approach to the water sector. The new approach involves a multi-
sectoral framework including key policy and institutional changes and is supported by the new generation of Bank 
projects currently under implementation (Sana’a Basin, Groundwater and Soil Conservation, Urban Water Supply, 
Irrigation Improvements, and Rural Water Supply and Sanitation). This approach is facilitating the dialogue with 
the Government and is now focused on developing policies for: improved management of aquifer recharge; better 
capture and use of run-off from rainfall; enhanced efficiency of both urban utilities and irrigators; expanded 
coverage of safe water supply and sanitation in rural areas; and evolution of wastewater treatment and recycling 
options that are appropriate for Yemen. The new approach focuses on the major elements below:  
• Building local consensus through a process of monitoring depletion rates, communicating the results to 
stakeholders, and improving irrigation efficiency; 
Institutionalizing the existing (informal) usage of pricing mechanisms to set the ground rules for transferring 
water from rural to urban use; 
• Managing water and sanitation services at the lowest appropriate level, through the continued decentralization 
of service provision to the local corporations and water user associations and private sector participation, 
where feasible; 
• 
Providing water and sanitation services based on local preferences and willingness to pay; and 
• Redefining the mandates of the water authorities to one of regulating providers, facilitating investments and 
disseminating knowledge, rather than being involved in direct service provisioning. 

• 

There have been signs of improvement: Investments in irrigation have shown that water use efficiency can be 
considerably improved, and some water conservation has been achieved. A number of autonomous Local 
Corporations have been created for urban water and a major urban water investment program is underway. The 
rural water institution has been restructured, a rural water sub-sector strategy has been prepared, and demand 
responsive approaches are being implemented. 

Infrastructure 

37. Roads.  Much of the rural population (accounting for over ¾ of the total population) 
lives in relative isolation due to geographical circumstances e.g. the rugged and 
mountainous conditions in the northwest of the country and poor condition of the rural 
roads network.   By late 2004, Yemen has made good progress towards the PRSP output 

19 Unmet need is the difference between the percentage of women who do not want to become pregnant in 
the next two years or do not want to become pregnant at all, but are not using contraceptives (Svanemyr 
(2006); Promoting the Demand for Family Planning in Yemen - an Assessment for the World Bank (draft)). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
- 15 - 

targets for the transport sector with 900 km/year of paved roads being added.  Overall, 
the length of the paved road network has doubled in the period between 1990 and 2003. 
During the past years, funding for the road sector has been about US$100 million per 
year, with roughly half coming from external sources. The capability to plan and 
implement programs in the road sector has also seen improvement.  The remaining 
challenges relate to:  insufficient coverage of rural areas with all-weather roads (only 28 
percent of households); institutional challenges in particular, deficiencies in budget 
allocation processes which are being addressed through a parallel system of Rural 
Accessibility Planning which has proved successful in its pilot phase; and inadequate 
maintenance of the road network due to underfunding (less than half of the required 
US$26 million per year is available) and a backlog of road rehabilitation works. 

38. Power.  Yemen is the least electrified country in the MENA region with only about 
40 percent of the total population having access to electricity; in rural areas, the 
electrification rate is even lower at only about 20 percent.   The state owned Public 
Electricity Corporation (PEC) owns and manages generation plants which are old and in 
need of significant rehabilitation.  By the end of 2005, load shedding was over 20 percent 
of peak demand due to lack of generating capacity and high losses from the transmission 
and distribution network.  The tariff structure provides a subsidy to a large part of the 
consumers and tariffs have not increased regularly in the past years and generally fall 
short of covering costs.  Despite this, PEC’s financial position has improved somewhat 
with limited investments and better collections; revenues covered 90 percent of operating 
costs in FY04 as compared with 77 percent in FY00.   The short-term priorities are: 
increase in generation capacity through the installation of small diesel plants, major 
overhaul of several power stations; and continued reduction of transmission and 
distribution losses.  For the medium-term, the Government will be generating additional 
power using natural gas; a 741 MW gas fired generation is expected to be commissioned 
in two phases by 2010.   

39. Land.  As a critical input into all economic activities (rural and urban), land 
allocation and titling remains a major challenge for the Government where little progress 
has been made in the recent past.    Moreover, a significant proportion of court cases 
involve land-related disputes which stem from an inefficient public land administration 
system and weak land titling and registration systems.  Over the medium-term, reforms 
will be needed to: strengthen and clarify the legal and regulatory framework concerning 
land related issues; streamline and rationalize the roles and mandates of institutions 
dealing with public land management; and provide an operational framework for 
strengthening land titling and registration through a proposed series of pilot activities 
intended to improve the land registration capture rate in the pilot areas.   

40. ICT.  Currently Yemen has limited fixed line infrastructure (with 4 percent 
coverage as compared to the MNA average of 9 percent), somewhat better mobile 
coverage (9 percent though the rate is among the lowest in the region) and very limited 
Internet usage (0.51 percent of the population).  Availability of services in rural areas is 
even lower.  Prices of international voice and Internet services are higher than in other 
MNA countries. These problems arise from: monopoly of service provision for the fixed 

  
 
 
- 16 - 

network; and regulation being performed by the same Ministry which is a market player 
in fixed and mobile service provision.  The postal sector shows similar weaknesses: 
monopoly service provision, no regulation and a chronic structural deficit. International 
experience indicates that improving sector structure and regulatory reform could have 
substantial impact on improving access to services and reducing end user prices.  

Qat 

41. Cultivation and chewing of qat is pervasive in Yemen.  There are several negative 
impacts: qat consumes one-third of the abstracted groundwater; household expenditures 
are diverted from food consumption; time devoted to the daily qat chewing session 
represents at least a 25 per cent productivity loss; and there are also adverse health 
effects.  However, qat is far too well integrated into the Yemeni economy and society for 
significant reductions in its cultivation and use to occur in the short-term.   The PRSP 
focused on the impact of qat cultivation on the scarce water resources but stopped short 
of defining a specific program to deal with this issue.20  Given lack of domestic 
consensus on addressing this issue, priority needs to be given to re-engaging society on 
the negative impact of qat. 

Avian Influenza 

42. While there have been no reported cases in the country so far, Yemen lies on the 
main bird migratory routes between Central Asia, Eastern Europe and Africa.  Poultry 
meat currently represents 65% of total meat consumption with the local poultry sector 
supplying more than half of the demand. A Rapid Assessment has been conducted and 
results are being finalized.  Assistance, if needed, will require a multisectoral approach 
integrating animal health, public health and communication components.   

Gender 

43. Yemen has significant gender inequality and the Government has included progress 
in gender equality as part of its key PRSP goals.  Many of the activities in the Bank 
program directly (e.g. increased classrooms for girls’ education) and indirectly (e.g. 
increasing water availability which in turn allows girls to attend school) impact on gender 
issues.  The activities have led to some progress: between 1996 and 2004, the Gender 
Parity Index improved from 0.39 to 0.66 for basic, from 0.27 to 0.45 for secondary and 
from 0.21 to 0.35 for university education.   There are still large remaining challenges for 
the economic empowerment of women; the draft Investment Climate Assessment shows 
that women constitute only 10 percent of entrepreneurs and 6 percent of the workforce.   
Addressing the main constraints to growth of all businesses as identified in paragraph  23 
will help women entrepreneurs even more as they have identified these constraints to be 
even more binding to growth of their businesses. 

20 Yemen PRSP, 2002.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 17 - 

B. Medium-Term Outlook   
44. Economic growth picked up in 2005, but exchange rate and inflationary pressures 
were present. Oil production declined by less than one percent as a result of further 
drilling in existing wells, while overall GDP was boosted by higher activity in 
agriculture, construction, and transport. The Yemeni rial experienced downward pressure 
in mid-year, as the government struggled to pass several key reforms. Inflation was on a 
downward trend during January-July, but spiked in August-October following increases 
in domestic fuel prices. 

45. As noted in Table 1 below, the short run situation looks manageable because of 
high oil prices and one-off investment activities related to the construction of the LNG 
plant. Although oil production is expected to decline, non-oil growth is expected to be 
strong in part due to construction of the LNG plant.  Inflation will remain at current 
levels (around 15 percent) in 2006 before beginning to average about 12 percent for the 
remainder of the CAS period. The central government’s projected budget deficit for 
2006, at 3.0 percent of GDP, should not significantly complicate macroeconomic 
management due to better than budgeted oil revenues and restraint on expenditure. 

Table 1: SELECTED MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS 

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005  Est. 2006 Proj.

2007-10

Real Sector (annual % change)
Real GDP 
Real oil GDP 
Real non-oil GDP
CPI inflation 1
Investment (% of GDP)
Total investment
    Private Investment
Government finance  (% of GDP)
Revenue (including grants)
   Oil & Gas
   Non-oil
   Grants
Total expenditure and net lending
Overall balance (deficit(-)) (commitment basis)
Non-Oil primary balance
External sector (US $ million)
Current account
Exports of goods 
Imports of goods 
                    Service (net)
Gross reserves 2
Gross reserves (months of imports)
Current account balance (% of GDP)
Memorandum items:
Crude oil produciton (1000 barrels per day)
Average oil export price (US$/barrel) 3

4.6
1.3
5.2
10.7

18.9
11.8

35.3
25.3
9.8
0.3
32.8
2.6
(20.5)

3302
2771
(718)
3569
12.5
5.3

189
23.0

3.9
0.4
4.6
6.8

20.8
13.4

33.6
22.3
9.7
1.6
34.8
(1.2)
(21.5)

3584
3083
(633)
4056
12.1
5.4

433
24.6

3.1
(1.8)
4.0
11.9

22.1
13.3

30.9
22.1
8.5
0.4
35.7
(4.8)
(25.1)

3923
3557
(748)
4445
12.5
(0.1)

425
27.9

2.6
(6.9)
4.1
12.0

23.0
13.8

32.0
23.1
8.1
0.7
34.2
(2.3)
(23.2)

4654
3858
(757)
5108
12.6
1.9

396
36.6

3.8
(0.9)
4.5
14.6

22.3
14.0

38.1
29.0
9.1
0.0
40.5
(2.4)
(28.9)

6624
4338
(976)
5370
9.6
4.7

393
51.5

3.9
(6.3)
5.4
15.7

29.0
14.5

36.1
25.8
9.8
0.6
39.1
(3.0)
(26.4)

7026
6198
(1220)
5762
9.8
(4.6)

368
58.3

3.7
(6.4)
4.8
11.8

30.2
21.8

29.9
16.8
12.5
0.6
34.9
(4.9)
(19.0)

6028
6280
(1029)
3979
7.1
(6.0)

309
59.5

Source: World Bank and IMF Staff Estimates.
1/ Core CPI is defined as CPI excluding qat.
2/ Gross reserves less commercial bank & pension fund foreign exchange deposits at Central Bank.
3/ Oil price differs from WEO price as Yemeni oil is traded at a discount.

 
 
 
    
 
 
- 18 - 

46. Medium-term prospects are more worrisome but can be managed through a set of 
policy measures and reforms which will need to include rationalization of government 
expenditure (particularly the reduction of energy subsidies and controlling the wage bill), 
an increase in the tax effort, and structural reforms to facilitate the adjustment to lower oil 
revenues, as well as to enhance the effectiveness and credibility of public financial 
management, and boost prospects for economic growth.  This package of measures is 
under discussion and is expected to be reflected in the Second PRSP document.   

47. Medium-term debt sustainability.  Yemen currently has significant foreign 
exchange reserves and a positive trade balance.  However, with heavy dependence on a 
single commodity, the projected decrease in oil production will translate into lower 
foreign exchange revenues in the medium-term and additional debt will most likely need 
to be raised domestically; Debt Sustainability Analysis undertaken as part of the 
Development Policy Review reveals that Yemen faces a moderate risk of debt distress.  
Under the baseline all the relevant debt distress indicators stay below their respective 
thresholds. But, several stress tests show that: the baseline would be vulnerable to further 
shocks to the country’s weak and barely diversified export base; lower than anticipated 
future oil prices would lead to a rapid deterioration of Yemen’s prospects for external 
debt sustainability; and fiscal sustainability could be easily imperiled by slippages in the 
fiscal adjustment program. 

 
 
 
 
 
- 19 - 

IV. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY  

A. Past Bank Assistance 

48. The 2003-2005 World Bank Country Assistance Strategy for Yemen was designed 
to support the Government’s first PRSP and the four pillars of the CAS were consistent 
with the five key areas in the PRSP. Seven projects (and commitments of US$387 
million) were added to the portfolio of projects under implementation.  Over the period of 
the previous CAS, disbursements remained fairly constant (at around 16 per cent or 
approximately US$85-95 million per annum).  The quality of the portfolio improved 
significantly during the last year (with unsatisfactory projects and projects at risk as a 
percentage of the portfolio declining from 20 percent in June 2004 to 6 percent in June 
2005).   Several non-lending activities were undertaken though only a limited number 
were publicly disseminated. 

49. Country Assistance Evaluation FY99-FY05.  The CAE (undertaken by the 
Independent Evaluation Group of the World Bank) covers the last two Country 
Assistance Strategies and rates the overall outcome as moderately unsatisfactory. It 
concludes 
that 
there was unsatisfactory progress on governance; moderately 
unsatisfactory progress on the investment climate and on water resource management;  
and moderately satisfactory progress on social sector/gender issues.  The principal 
lessons  and recommendations are that the future Bank program should: 

• 
learn local conditions by conducting adequate research and developing issue-specific 
knowledge to have country specific solutions (e.g. as in the water sector); 
• moderate optimism by making more realistic assessments of ownership, speed of 
implementation and likely outcomes; 
• upgrade governance as a central constraint to delivering public services and as a 
cross-cutting theme in its program; 
• conserve water - Bank support to help conserve groundwater is essential; 
• counteract qat by helping to investigate the economic, social and resource 
implications of producing qat and support education and public awareness campaigns. 
improve population policy by assisting in accelerating the demographic transition in 
Yemen. 

• 

 
 
 
 
- 20 - 

50. CAS Completion Report.  The CAS Completion Report (Annex 3) also indicates 
that outcomes were unsatisfactory for governance and private sector development; 
moderately unsatisfactory for environmental sustainability and moderately satisfactory 
for the human development pillar.  In addition to the lessons from the IEG CAE, there are 
four other lessons drawn by the CASCR: 21 

• CAS Results Selectivity: Given that donor assistance to Yemen is extremely limited, 
donor projects need to balance competing goals of delivering immediate results 
(essential to build confidence in public service delivery) and improving the long-term 
delivery capacity of Government’s systems;   
• Long-Term Partnerships:  The optimal approach - adopted for education, water and 
PFM -  was to assist the Government in developing a sector strategy (through non-
lending assistance); aligning donor support around the sector strategy and designing 
IDA projects within this broader harmonization context;  
• Strengthening state capacity and accountability: In the context of weak capacity, 
actions to move away from PMUs and mainstream implementation need to be 
considered on a sector-by-sector basis taking into account the pace of actions to 
strengthen fiduciary systems (procurement and financial management) and 
implementation capacity (progress in sector level civil service restructuring).  An 
alternative approach is to formalize and provide greater autonomy to enclave entities 
(e.g. the Social Fund for Development and the Public Works Project). 
• Greater Implementation Focus:  For lending activities, new projects need to be: (a) 
not too complex for the implementing environment; and (b) subject to rigorous 
criteria to ensure that they are ready for implementation prior to effectiveness to 
reduce implementation delays.  For non-lending activities, a country level approach to 
managing the portfolio of non-lending activities is required to reduce fragmentation 
and ensure a focus on dissemination/leveraging support to major Government reform 
priorities. 

51. Despite the moderately unsatisfactory rating of the CAE and the unsatisfactory 
rating of the CASCR, both evaluations recognized that there had been substantial 
progress made in education and social development and that by not lending, the Bank had 
assisted in the transformation of the fisheries sector (Box 3).   Further, despite limited 
impact achieved under the 2003-2005 CAS, many of the building blocks for the next 
CAS were finally put into place during the last twelve to eighteen months of the previous 
CAS.  These included:  public financial management; civil service reform; water resource 
management; and support to urban economic development in the port cities particularly 
in Aden.  In these key areas, there are locally owned reform strategies and the challenge 
for the next CAS would be on supporting implementation. 

21 The lessons in the CASCR are consistent with international experience with gradual reformers as noted 
in Fragile States – Good Practice in Country Assistance Strategies, World Bank, 2005. 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 21 - 

Box 3:  Key Successes under 2003-2005 Country Assistance Strategy 

Basic Education: Fixing Government Delivery Systems.  The significant improvements in the education sector 
provide a good illustration of the optimal approach to achieving impact in Yemen.   First, there was demonstrated 
Government commitment: through budgetary allocations (6.8 percent of GDP or 22% of total government expenditures 
in 2004) and strong leadership at the Ministry of Education.  Second, donor harmonization is working well with the 
education sector being the furthest along with a formal partnership of 12 donors which worked with the government in 
drafting the Basic Education Development Strategy and, since 2005, has been reviewing the strategy annually.   Multi-
donor financing arrangements are in place both through the global EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund; and through a country 
specific multi-donor Trust Fund being implemented in conjunction with ongoing World Bank projects.  Third, the Bank 
invested heavily in the strategic planning and analytical phases and its work provided the basis for the systemic changes 
(e.g. rationalizing teacher deployment and the inspectors’ corps in coordination with the civil service reform process; 
building national capacity for education assessment and international benchmarking of the learning achievements of 
Yemeni students; and utilizing school mapping in making school construction decisions).  Fourth, Bank projects 
supported clear and simple implementation arrangements with a focus on capacity building which has led to 
satisfactory performance even in difficult implementing environments.   This success has had spillover effects as a 
similar approach has been adopted for secondary education, technical and vocational training, higher education and a 
children and youth strategy.    

Social Fund for Development and Public Works Program: Successful Enclave Approaches. 
The Yemen Social Fund for Development was established in 1997 to strengthen the social safety net and adapt the 
demand-driven approach in community development.  The Bank has itself provided $165 million through three IDA 
credits (two closed with highly satisfactory ratings and one under implementation since August 2004); led donor 
coordination efforts to increase coverage of SFD activities; and played a role in assisting the SFD in improving quality 
and efficiency of service delivery; decreasing unit costs of school construction; ensuring community participation; and 
a demand driven approach to service delivery.  An Impact Evaluation Study on SFD projects during 1998 – 2003 
concluded that: the project targeting worked well with 40% of resources going to the poorest three deciles and only 4% 
to the top decile; girls’ enrollment increased from 42% in 1999 to 58% in 2003; sick individuals receiving health care 
rose from 55% to 68%; access to household tap water increased by 35%, distance for fetching water reduced by 19% 
and time needed to fetch water by 14%; and rural roads projects reduced journey cost and time by 40%, daily in-and-
out-trips increased by 180%.  

The Public Works Program was established in 1996 as a semi-autonomous implementing entity in the Ministry of 
Planning and International Cooperation.  The Bank has itself provided $120 million through three IDA credits (two 
closed with highly satisfactory ratings and one under implementation since July 2004); led donor coordination efforts 
and raised an additional $90 million from other donors to increase coverage of PWP activities. PWP has provided small 
scale infrastructure and community assets to deprived and poor communities throughout Yemen, including schools, 
health clinics, water harvesting and water supply/sanitation infrastructure, and paved roads.  Over 7 million Yemenis 
have benefited from PWP-financed activities in addition to thousands of temporary man days created through its labor-
intensive works (a minimum of 30% labor content is required for all PWP activities). The Bank’s Independent 
Evaluation Group (IEG) has assessed the PWP as a highly successful project.  

Fisheries Sector: Achieving Development Impact By Not Lending.   The Bank had supported the fisheries sector in 
Yemen through five loans up to 1999.   However the sector framework was not conducive to maximizing the poverty 
reduction impact of the sector with large foreign industrial vessels undertaking unsustainable exploitation of fish 
stocks, low economic benefits with exports of only US$13 million and the crowding out of small-scale artisanal 
fishing.  On the basis of sector work (a Fisheries Sector Strategy Note), the Bank decided to postpone further lending 
until the sector framework was changed.  When the sector framework was changed with the discontinuation of 
licensing in 2002 and 2003, there was a dramatic impact.   Fish production from small-scale fisheries, fish exports, and 
sector employment all started growing at double digit rates and by 2004 fish exports reached a level of about $210 
million.  In view of the more favorable policy framework, the Bank has recommenced lending under the 2006-2009 
CAS with an IDA credit about $25 million.   

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
- 22 - 

B.  Government’s Development Program and the CAS  

52. The Government is currently in the process of preparing its Second Poverty 
Reduction Strategy (2006-2010).  Priorities in the new plan continue to have a high 
degree of continuity from the previous PRSP and Development Plans.22  The strategic 
focus of the Second PRSP can be clustered into: growth; improving human development; 
and improving governance/fiscal sustainability. 23  

53. The CAS is based on the Government’s Second PRSP.  Since mid-2005, the 
Government has undertaken extensive country-wide consultations in preparing its Second 
PRSP.  Further, the Government has widely discussed its main thinking with all 
stakeholders particularly donors.  These consultations have also benefited the preparation 
of the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy which was sequenced to follow the PRSP 
preparation processes.   

54. CAS preparation has involved the Government, civil society, the private sector and 
donor partners.  The Government established a CAS counterpart team which the Bank 
has worked closely with throughout the preparation process.  In November 2005, 
extensive consultations were held in Sana’a and Aden with central and local government 
officials, civil society, private sector and donors.  Follow-up consultations were held in 
early March 2006 with members of the newly appointed Cabinet to discuss and validate 
the selection of strategic priorities under the new CAS.  Several multilateral and bilateral 
donors were designing their country assistance programs in late 2005/early 2006 and 
there was considerable collaboration in the analytical and priority setting phases of CAS 
preparation. 

55. The Second PRSP document together with the Joint Staff Assessment is expected to 
be presented to the Executive Directors in January 2007.  It was considered prudent to 
proceed with the CAS ahead of the JSA for three reasons:  first, the priorities in the 
Second PRSP are clear and are not expected to change as the document is finalized, 
translated and then reviewed by Bank and IMF staff.  Second, a recent Progress Report 
on PRSP implementation has recently been circulated to the Executive Directors in May 
2006.  Third, given declining CPIA ratings and reduced IDA allocations, there is urgent 
need to have a clearly defined strategy to prioritize World Bank interventions.  Further, 
early action would also allow the Government to seek alternative financing for activities 
that the Bank is unable to finance.    

22 The second PRSP will also serve as the 3rd Five Year Development Plan and in order to produce one 
document, the period for both has been aligned. 
23 Focus on growth is through pillars on stimulating economic growth; enhancing economic reform; and 
integrating with regional and international economies. There is a pillar on improving human capital to 
achieve the MDGs.  Fiscal sustainability issues are identified under pillars on enhancing good governance; 
and supporting decentralization for local and rural development.  There is a pillar on strengthening 
partnerships with the private sector, civil society and donors in order to implement the PRSP.   Finally, the 
empowerment objectives of a poverty reduction strategy are embedded within other goals. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 23 - 

C. Development Partners  

56. Yemen benefits from support from a small group of bilateral donors (France, 
Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, United Kingdom and United States) and 
multilateral donors (regional financial organizations such as the Arab Fund for Economic 
and Social Development; the Islamic Development Bank and the Saudi Fund; European 
Union; OPEC Fund for International Development; United Nations agencies and the 
World Bank).  The International Monetary Fund does not currently provide financial 
support but provides Technical Assistance and annually conducts Article IV 
consultations.  Donor support for meeting external financing needs has been modest at 
around US$12 per capita.  Annual donor inflows amount to around US$200 million (1.25 
percent of GDP or less than 15 percent of development expenditures) and IDA 
disbursements at around US$100 million (less than 0.625 percent of GDP or less than 7.5 
percent of development expenditures). While it is likely that some donors, such as the 
Arab Funds, DfID and USAID may increase their support over the CAS period, the level 
of support is unlikely to return to higher levels that prevailed during the second half of 
the 1990s. 

57. Recent Decline in Aid Allocations.  Several bilateral donors (including IDA) have 
begun to utilize the World Bank computed Country Policy and Institutional Assessment 
(CPIA) to calculate their aid allocations.  The CPIA evaluates country performance on 
four dimensions:  economic management; structural policies; policies for social 
inclusion/equity; and governance/public sector management.  The CPIA rating for 
Yemen declined between 2003 and 2004 primarily due 
to a reduction 
in 
governance/public sector management ratings which resulted in a decline in aid 
allocations; for example, Yemen’s FY06-08 IDA allocation declined to SDR 187.9 
million for the three year period which represents a 34 percent reduction from its FY05-
07 allocation.  The CPIA rating remained unchanged from 2004 to 2005.  The major 
issues that have led to lower CPIA ratings are being addressed through the actions 
contained in the National Agenda for Reform (Box 1).  Hence, if suitably implemented, 
these actions may be expected to improve future CPIA ratings. 

58. Donor Coordination.  Given the small size of the donor community, donor 
coordination efforts have been progressing well with the World Bank and the UN 
Resident Coordinator chairing quarterly in-country donor coordination meetings.  In 
January 2005, several bilateral and multilateral donors (European Union, France, 
Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, United States, World Bank, United Kingdom, 
United States and United Nations) signed a harmonization agreement to implement the 
February 2003 Rome Declaration’s commitments on harmonization.  Further, in 2005, 
Yemen was also selected among the initial group of pilot countries where the OECD 
Principles for Good International Engagement in Fragile States are being implemented. 
These principles can be clustered into four themes: a long-term focus on state capacity 
and accountability; recognition of political, security and development linkages; close 
partnerships between international actors to ensure delivery of results; and donor 
organizational responses must be calibrated to the specific needs of countries. The United 
Kingdom and the UN system have been supporting this effort.  An Aid Harmonization 

 
 
 
- 24 - 

Assistance unit has been established in the Ministry of Planning and International 
Cooperation and is now leading the Government’s donor coordination effort. 

59. Sector/Theme Partnerships.  In addition to country level coordination work, there 
has been substantial progress in coordinating efforts at the level of sectors and themes 
(Table 2).   These partnerships are working well;  all of the projects approved under this 
CAS in FY06 have been co-financed by other donors and given IDA constraints, this will 
continue to remain a central thrust of the Bank’s approach. 

Table 2: DONOR PARTNERSHIPS 

Financial sector 
Health 

Sector/Theme 
Civil Service Reform 
Education 

Other Donors Involved 
Netherlands, UK 
France, Germany, ILO, Netherlands,  
UNICEF, UK, WFP  
USAID 
EU, Germany, Netherlands, UK, 
UNFPA,  UNICEF, US, WHO 
Procurement 
Netherlands 
Public Financial Management France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, 
UK, UNDP, US 
Arab Fund, EU, France, IFAD,  Italy, 
US 
Arab Fund, IFAD, Saudi Fund, Qatar 
Fund, EU and USAID 
Social Fund for Development Arab Fund, EU, Germany, Kuwait, 
IFAD, IsDB, Netherlands, OPEC, 
Saudi Arabia, UK,  US 
Cities Alliance, UN Habitat, UNDP 

Public Works Program 

Rural Roads 

Urban and Local 
Development 

Water  

Germany, Netherlands 

Coordination arrangements 
Ongoing coordination 
Partnership Agreement signed in 
2004.  Joint Annual Reviews. 
Ongoing coordination 
Partnership Agreement signed in 
2005. 
Ongoing coordination 
Partnership Agreement signed in 
2006. 
Ongoing coordination 

Ongoing coordination 

Joint Assessment Reviews 

Joint Workshops/Coordination on 
Decentralization, training 
curriculum and delivery strategies 
Joint Assessment Reviews 

60. Recent Developments.  Neighboring countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council 
(Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the Sultanate of 
Oman) are offering Yemen the long-term prospect of regional integration and substantial 
short-term assistance is likely to be provided to develop the institutions, infrastructure 
and human capacities during the extended transitional period of getting there.   These 
discussions are progressing well and the Government is planning to convene – with 
assistance from the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom 
(DfID) and the World Bank - a Consultative Group Meeting in November 2006 and an 
Investor’s Conference - with IFC’s assistance – in February 2007. 

61. World Bank Country Office.   The Country Office plays a key role in donor 
coordination.  Further, in many sectors/themes, field based Bank staff have been taking 
the lead on policy dialogue with the Government.  There have been two major 
constraints.  First, difficulties with attracting internationally recruited staff to be based in 
Sana’a – which is a problem affecting most donor partners.  Second, administrative costs 
associated with placing a large number of international staff in the field.  Given the 

 
 
 
 
 
- 25 - 

potentially positive impact of day-to-day dialogue with the Government, the UK 
Government will be financing, initially for a period of three years, four internationally 
recruited specialists in the World Bank Country Office – in macro-economic 
management, public sector management, education and water.  The education specialist is 
already on board and the remaining specialists would be in place by the end of 2006.   

D. CAS Design: Pillars, Outcomes and Instruments 

62. The CAS pillars are consistent with the key focal areas in the Government’s Second 
PRSP (i.e. diversifying growth; human development; and fiscal sustainability).  Further, 
the CAS has elevated resource sustainability to a pillar; the issues (water and population) 
are part of the activities under the Second PRSP and consolidating them under a pillar 
emphasizes their critical importance for long-term sustainability.  In order to prioritize 
activities under each pillar, the analysis (under the Development Policy Review, Country 
Social Analysis, Investment Climate Assessment, IEG Country Assistance Evaluation 
and CAS Completion Report) was utilized to narrow down the issues (see Box 5). 

63. Pillar One:  Diversifying growth through better governance and better 
delivery of public services. Based on the key constraints analyzed in paragraphs 21 to 
28, this pillar would focus on four outcomes: 
• 
Improving the business regulatory environment including: new business registration; 
tax policy and administration; customs and inspections; and land titling and 
registration. 
Improving road and power infrastructure – this outcome would also support the 
human development pillar. 
Improving skills through technical education and vocational training and higher 
education 
Improving regulatory frameworks and making appropriate public investments in key 
sectors (rainfed and irrigated agriculture; fisheries; manufacturing; and gas sector). 

• 

• 

• 

64. Pillar Two: Improving human development through more efficient service 
delivery and improved safety nets.   Based on the key constraints analyzed in 
paragraphs 29 to 34, this pillar would focus on four outcomes: 
• 
Improving access, equity and quality of basic education; 
• 
Improving access and quality of health; 
• 
Improving safety net programs;  and  
• 
Improving water supply and sanitation  

65. Pillar Three: Increasing fiscal sustainability through 
improved public 
expenditure management.  Based on the key constraints analyzed in paragraphs 11 to 
20, this pillar would focus on five outcomes: 
• 
Improving revenue transparency 
• 
Improving expenditure management (including through reducing fuel subsidies) 
• Public Sector Reform  
• 
Improving public procurement 
• 
Improving public financial management 

 
 
 
 
 
- 26 - 

66. Pillar Four: Increasing resource sustainability through improved management 
of water resources and reduced population pressure.  Based on the key constraints 
analyzed in paragraphs  35 and  36, this pillar would focus on two outcomes: 
• 
improved water resource management 
• 
improved control over population growth. 

• 

67. Short-Term Priorities on Economic Governance.  The CAS recognizes the 
importance of upfront actions to improve economic governance; these actions need to be 
implemented immediately even though the outcomes may only be visible in the medium-
term.  Across the four  pillars, the following are the key short-term actions on improving 
economic governance together with the rationale for their selection: 
• oil revenue transparency - would ensure better use of oil revenues and also lead to 
increase willingness to be taxed. 
improved expenditure management - would ensure that expenditure cuts do not 
fray the safety nets, jeopardize the delivery of basic services or result in the 
deferment of public investments needed to support private sector development.  
This will need to include reduction in fuel subsidies which will also have an 
impact on individual incentives for extraction of scarce water resources. 
improved business regulatory environment including improving predictability in 
macro-economic management, regulation, taxation and inspections.   
improved institutional arrangements and public service delivery mechanisms for 
groundwater resource management and controlling population growth.   

• 

• 

68. CAS Instruments.  The outcomes supported by the CAS would be achieved through 
a number of instruments: a significant ongoing portfolio of IDA credits (approved under 
previous CASs) will continue to be implemented under this CAS period; new IDA credits 
would be provided during the CAS period; and a focused program of non-lending 
services would also be provided.  The use of a mix of instruments to support one 
particular outcome is highlighted in Box 4 which describes the approach adopted to help 
the Government with improving control over population growth. 

Box 4:   World Bank Support to Population Issues 
The Bank’s involvement in the Population sector has included considerable analytical and advisory support 
including a 2002 Population Policy Note on Demographic Trends, 2004 Technical Assistance to support the 
preparation of the Government’s Five-Year Plan on population and reproductive health and assistance to the 
National Population Council (NPC) in the costing of its three-year Population Action Plan.  More recently, in 
April 2006, the Bank completed a Yemen Population Policy Paper and a study on Promoting the Demand for 
Family Planning in Yemen.  The findings and recommendations from these outputs provide a sound basis for 
understanding the underlying determinants of the high fertility rate as well as priority policies and actions needed 
by the Government and the partner agencies to address the high population growth rate in Yemen.  During the 
CAS period, the Bank will restructure its on-going Health Reform Support Project to expand its support to 
family planning and reproductive health programs, including a major investment in the contraceptive commodity 
supply for 2008.  In addition, the restructured project will also place greater emphasis on basic child and 
maternal health programs that over the longer term will contribute to the reduction in total fertility rate through 
reductions in infant, child, and maternal mortality rates.  An updated strategy is expected to result from the 
ongoing Health Sector Review and to form the basis for the planned Population II project.    

 
 
 
- 27 - 

Table 3:  PREVIOUS LENDING PROGRAM AND IMPACT ON COUNTRY 
DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

Human 
Development 

Fiscal 
Sustainability 

Resource 
Sustainability 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Non-oil growth 

FY 
close 
2006 

FY 
appr 
1998 

2000 
2000 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2002 

2008 
2006 
2007 
2006 
2008 
2007 
2007 

Country Development Goals: 2006-09 CAS 

Existing Portfolio at start of 
2003-05 CAS 
Southern Governorates 
Agricultural 
Civil Service Modernization  
Child Development 
Basic Education Expansion 
Rural Access Improvement APL I 
Rural Water Supply & Sanitation 
Irrigation Improvement APL I 
Taiz Municipal Development & 
Flood Protection 
Health Reform Support 
Higher Education 
Port Cities APL I 
Sana’a Basin Water Management 
APL I 
Urban Water Supply & Sanitation 
APL I 
Social Fund For Development III 
2004 
2009 
Third Public Works 
2004 
2009 
Groundwater & Soil Conservation 2004 
2010 
Basic Education Expansion 
2005 
2010 
X 
The table above shows that the earlier portfolio was heavily focused on the human development goal and 
had a limited focus on the three other goals.   

2008 
2007 
2007 
2009 

2002 
2002 
2003 
2003 

2003 

2008 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

69. Existing Portfolio.  At the start of the new CAS period (July 2005), the Bank had 
17 active IDA credits in Yemen with an undisbursed balance of US$567 million;  
approximately US$116 million has already been disbursed during the first ten months of  
FY06. There is only one project (Health Reform Support) rated unsatisfactory for 
achievement of Development Objectives as well as on Implementation Progress; after 
extensive discussions with the Government, this project is being formally restructured to 
reflect the revised strategic approach and better address implementation capacity 
constraints. 

70. New Lending.  The total volume of lending based on Yemen’s IDA allocations is 
declining.   IDA allocations are determined utilizing a Country Performance Rating that 
takes into account the country’s policy performance (as measured through the Country 
Policy and Institutional Assessment); the country’s governance environment; and the 
performance of the existing IDA portfolio.  The FY06-08 IDA allocation was determined 
based on Yemen’s calendar year 2004 CPIA ratings and 2004 portfolio performance.  
Given reduction in 2004 Country Performance Rating, Yemen’s IDA allocation declined 
to SDR 187.9 million for the three year period which represents a 34 percent reduction 
from its FY05-07 allocation.  Given that the FY07-09 IDA allocation is not yet available, 
the lending program has been designed on the basis of earlier allocations and set at 
US$100 million per annum or a total of US$400 million over the CAS period.   The IDA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 28 - 

three year lending allocation will be updated annually and improvements (or 
deterioration) in policy performance or portfolio implementation will directly increase (or 
decrease) the amount of new lending.   

Box 5:  Learning from the 2003-2005 CAS 
The design of the new CAS learns from the unsatisfactory results under the previous CAS.   
While the four pillars are similar to the four pillars of the last CAS, there are important 
differences:  
• Priorities within each Country Development Goal are narrowed down and achievable goals 
have been set.  The IEG CAE and the CASCR commended the last CAS for having focused the 
Bank’s broad priorities appropriately.  This CAS takes the focus further down to fifteen key CAS 
outcomes and results have been set commensurate with the Bank program.         
• Short-term focus on critical reforms.  There is a focus on short-term actions needed to stimulate 
growth and improve economic governance.  The Government’s program is being supported by 
both lending instruments (an Institutional Reform Credit) and non-lending assistance.  
• Readiness for implementation.  At the start of the previous CAS, many activities were awaiting 
the formulation of action plans.  Under the new CAS, the Bank is supporting: (i) the National 
Reform Program to improve governance which is already under implementation; (ii) sector and 
thematic programs already under implementation for education, water resource management and 
urban development; (iii) programs where design has been completed and implementation is about 
to commence (public financial management, procurement, civil service reform).  There are three 
areas where program design needs to be completed:  regulatory streamlining; improving the 
reproductive health and population program; and improving the targeting efficacy of the safety 
net system.   Bank analytical support is being provided in all three areas early in the CAS period. 
Improving Government systems.  There is a clearer recognition (particularly given IDA 
constraints) that the best approach for results selectivity is to develop long-term partnerships with 
other donors and to build state capacity through supporting programs to improve Government 
systems (procurement, financial management and civil service reform).   
Implementation focus.   While emphasizing the improvement of Government systems, there is 
recognition that, in the short-term, implementation will occur largely through the Bank’s project 
portfolio.  Hence, the Government is improving portfolio performance with the assistance of the 
World Bank’s Country Office; the Country Portfolio Performance Review process has been 
rejuvenated.  Close attention has been given by the leadership of the Ministry of Planning and 
International Cooperation and the Ministry of Finance and at the Cabinet level.  This emphasis 
has already shown results; in the first ten months of FY06, IDA disbursements in Yemen 
exceeded US$116 million (a disbursement ratio of 20.5 percent) as compared with a 
disbursement ratio of 16 percent for the previous CAS period. 

• 

• 

71. Lending selectivity and focus.  The focus of the lending program for the CAS 
period relative to the country development goals is shown below (Table 4). There are two 
key constraints affecting selectivity.  First, the limited annual lending allocation has led 
to an average of three IDA credits being provided each year.  Second, Yemen has a 
relatively large portfolio of Adaptable Program Loans (APLs)24; during CAS preparation, 
the Bank and the Government discussed the need for decisions on future phases of 
existing APLs to be taken in an informed manner. 25  While it has been agreed that two 
APLs would be consolidated, the Government has indicated its preference to proceed 
with all existing APLs provided triggers to move to subsequent phases are met and the 
merit of such phases is justified through project appraisal.  While acknowledging the 

24 Under such an instrument, the Bank and the Government agree to a longer-term program (an initially 
approved project and one or two follow-on projects if specific triggers are met). 
25 The discussions drew upon the findings of the Fourth Review of Adaptable Lending (July, 2005) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
- 29 - 

constraint this presents for the lending program, the Bank agreed that the original 
objectives of these programs remain priorities in the context of the new CAS.  This 
heightened the importance of selectivity in any new lending beyond subsequent phases of 
these APLs, and such lending will therefore focus on non-oil growth. 

Table 4:  NEW LENDING PROGRAM AND IMPACT ON COUNTRY  
DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

Country Development Goals: 2006-09 CAS 

Lending assistance under  
2006-09 CAS 
Fisheries 
Rural Access Improvement APL II 
Power Sector 
Rainfed Agriculture & Livestock 
Second Vocational Training  
Social Development 
Institutional Reform Credit (DPL) 
Urban Water Supply APL II 
Rural Energy 
Girls Secondary Education 
Population II 
Port Cities APL II 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit I  

FY 

2006 
2006 
2006 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2007 
2008 
2008 
2008 
2009 
2009 
2009 

Non-oil 
growth 

Human 
Development 

Fiscal 
Sustainability 

Resource 
Sustainability 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

72. Portfolio Management.  The Country Portfolio Performance Review process would 
continue and would be expanded to cover both lending and non-lending activities.  The 
total volume of projects in the portfolio will decline from 18 at the start to 12 by the end 
of the CAS period.  This smaller portfolio will allow the Bank to focus its efforts and 
will, over time, free up additional administrative budget resources for other activities – 
particularly non-lending assistance.  Further, by continuing with the same implementation 
arrangements for several of the new projects (particularly for APLs), project 
implementation is expected to continue smoothly without the start-up lags that were 
experienced under many of the projects under the previous CAS. 

73. Addressing fiduciary risks in Bank projects.  Yemen is a high risk-weak control 
environment country for fiduciary risks in Bank projects; the main fiduciary weaknesses 
relate to accounting and reporting, budgeting systems, internal controls and procurement 
and result from weak capacity (within project units and in external auditors) and high turn 
over of fiduciary staff.  Consequently, careful attention has been provided to fiduciary 
aspects during preparation of all projects under the new CAS.  Specifically, procurement 
activities have been carefully reviewed and suitable low thresholds have been applied for 
prior review to ensure that any risks are identified before contracting has been 
undertaken.   Similarly, reducing project’s complexity and ensuring that suitably trained 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 30 - 

financial management staffs and systems are being put in place during project 
preparation; projects are not considered ready for implementation until this has occurred.  

74. Development Policy Lending.  There are two development policy loans in the 
lending program.  The Institutional Reform Credit (in the second year of the CAS period) 
would focus on improving governance (including for growth).  The Poverty Reduction 
Support Credit (in the last year of the CAS period) would commence programmatic 
lending after an extensive program to reduce fiduciary risks has been undertaken and 
after a rigorous assessment conducted to confirm that key fiduciary risks have been 
lowered .   Specifically, 
• To assist the Government in dealing with the immediate reform agenda, the 
Institutional Reform Credit would primarily support the Government’s National 
Agenda For Reform (including actions on governance, public sector reform and 
private sector development actions) as well as sector-specific actions supporting 
improved governance.  The emphasis will be on a credible program of prior actions 
and establishment of specific financing needs for the program (e.g. with regard to the 
costs of retrenchment in support of the civil service reform program).   
• To assist the Government in dealing with the longer-term development agenda, the 
Poverty Reduction Support Credits would be based on the Government’s Second 
PRSP and its translation into a prioritized program in the context of a Medium-Term 
Expenditure Framework planning process and strengthening of procurement and 
financial management systems (in line with existing Government plans supported by 
donor funding).   An assessment of progress will be made in the context of several 
upcoming pieces of Economic and Sector Work (PER, CFAA and CPAR) prior to the 
final decision to move to programmatic lending in FY09.  Four key fiduciary risks in 
the Government’s systems would need to be reduced from current High Risk ratings 
(budget transparency; internal auditing; preparation of final accounts; and external 
auditing).  As has been the case with PRSCs in other countries, in addition to the 
overall emphasis on addressing fiduciary risks, each PRSC would focus in depth on 
one or more sectors.  Specifically, given the importance of rural water issues 
(irrigation, groundwater management and water supply and sanitation), the First 
PRSC would commence with this sector in FY09.  Subsequently, beyond the CAS 
period, the Second PRSC could have an additional focus on education sector.   This 
sequencing is determined in part by the closure of existing Bank projects providing 
support in these two areas.   

75. Non-lending assistance - Economic and Sector Work and Technical Assistance.  
In designing the non-lending assistance, priority was given to Economic and Sector Work 
which is considered to be part of the core country diagnostics and needs to be updated at 
least once every four to five years.  Further, given past fragmentation of the program, 
further attention was given to narrowing down the list of studies and Technical 
Assistance activities.   

76. Non-Lending Assistance - World Bank Institute.  Yemen is one of the WBI focus 
countries in MNA and has therefore been receiving a higher level of support.  The focal 
areas are expected to continue including: human development (health; education and 

 
 
 
- 31 - 

children and youth); governance; and water.   As in the past, the program of assistance 
will be closely linked with operational activities undertaken under the new CAS (e.g. the 
restructuring of the health sector reform project has been assisted through a Rapid Results 
Approach workshop). 

Table 5: ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK AND IMPACT ON COUNTRY 
DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

Economic and Sector Work 
under 2006-09 CAS 

FY 

Country Development Goals: 2006-09 CAS 

Non-oil 
growth 

Human 
Development 

Fiscal 
Sustainability 

Resource 
Sustainability 

Development Policy Review 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Country Social Analysis 
Poverty Assessment 
Public Expenditure Tracking 
Surveys 
Taiz Urban Poverty Analysis 
Gas Incentive Framework Policy 
Note 
Qat Survey and Policy Note 
Social Protection Strategy 
Public Expenditure Review 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Country Financial Accountability 
Assessment 
Overall Education Strategy 
Transport Sector Policy Note 
Gender Report 
Early Childhood Review 

2006 
2006 
2006 
2007 
2007 

2007 
2007 

2007 
2007 
2008 
2008 
2008 

2008 
2008 
2009 
2009 

X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 

X 

X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

Table 6:  PROPOSED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE & IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT 

Technical Assistance Support 
under 2006-09 CAS 

PRSP Support 
Statistical Master Plan 
Qat 
Strategic Communications 
Procurement 
PFM Action Plan 
EITI 
Land Management & Urban 
Upgrading Pilots 
Private Sector Support  
Health Sector Review 
Children & Youth Strategy 
National Water Strategy 
Environment 

FY 

Country Development Goals: 2006-09 CAS 

Non-oil 
growth 

X 
X 

X 

X 

X 

2006-09 
2006-09 
2008-09 
2007-09 
2006-09 
2006-09 
2007-09 
2008-09 

2007-09 
2006-07 
2006-09 
2006-09 
2006-09 

Human 
Development 

X 
X 
X 
X 

Resource 
Sustainability 

X 
X 
X 
X 

Fiscal 
Sustainability 

X 
X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 32 - 

77. The proposed lending and non-lending programs are summarized by goal in Annex 
5; in addition to the CAS period, the Annex also lists the pipeline of lending and non-
lending activities in the outer years (i.e. beyond the CAS period).  This has been done for 
three reasons.  First, some activities are programmed for the year beyond the CAS but 
will be in the fifth year of the PRSP (i.e. PRSC-II; PER- II and Transport Policy Note II).  
Second, some important lending activities (Integrated Urban Development, Higher 
Education and Solid Waste Management) could not be included under the CAS program 
due to IDA constraints and are shown in the outer years.  If IDA allocations should 
increase significantly as the result of greatly improved performance or if projects 
currently considered priority should not be prepared, then consideration would be given 
to accelerating these projects.  Finally, a non-lending activity on decentralization has 
been kept in the outer years.  While decentralization issues would be addressed through 
other ESW (including the PER, the CFAA and CPAR), if the Government should seek 
further advice on fiscal decentralization, then this task would be implemented in the CAS 
period.  This approach would avoid the problems under previous CASs where significant 
fiscal decentralization related lending and non-lending activities were initiated but never 
brought to closure. 

78. IFC program.  Yemen is one of IFC’s “frontier” countries in the MENA region, 
and it is making an extra effort to develop the private sector as well as promote south-to-
south investments into Yemen.  The main challenge has been finding strong local 
sponsors who are able to implement large projects.  IFC’s current investment portfolio is 
a modest US$9 million for 3 companies; however, its portfolio is expected to grow in the 
near future as, in FY06, a strong pipeline of projects in oil refining, ports, and 
construction materials has been developed.   
• 
In May 2006, IFC approved an investment of US$50 million (US$45 million loan and 
US$5 million equity) in the Ras Issa Refinery.  The investment is in a 60,000 barrel 
per day refinery, including the relevant offsite infrastructure on the Ras Issa peninsula 
on the Red Sea coast. The project is in line with the Government’s newly created 
framework to establish two new private sector owned and operated refineries to 
efficiently supply the eastern and western markets of Yemen. 
IFC is also considering an investment in a greenfield cement plant.  The plant would 
have a capacity of 1.2 million tons per annum, and would address a supply gap as 
over 60% of the annual consumption of 4.0 million tons is currently imported. 
IFC is also considering potential participation in a project for the expansion, 
operation, and maintenance of the Aden Container Terminal and of the Ma’alla 
Container Terminal.  
In addition to the investment pipeline above, IFC’s focus in the future would be in the 
financial sector, including leasing and microfinance.  Finally, IFC is keen to support the 
private sector’s participation in the development of the domestic gas sector including for 
power generation (see paragraph  27). 

• 

• 

79. 
In parallel, IFC has also increased technical assistance activities through the Private 
Enterprise Partnership-Middle East & North Africa (PEP-MENA) and has placed staff in 

 
 
- 33 - 

• 

Sana'a, co-located with the World Bank.  The focus is on four main areas: financial 
markets; SME development; gender; and Business Enabling Environment.   
• 
In financial markets, IFC has been active in leasing programs (including work with 
the Central Bank on leasing registration and legislation and the organization of an 
international leasing conference in-country) and is initiating microfinance TA to 
support the initiatives of the second largest Yemeni bank to service this sector.   
In SME development, IFC has focused on management training through Business 
Edge, including Train-the-Trainer programs for companies in Yemen, Chambers of 
Commerce, and the Social Fund for Development.   
IFC’s gender program work has included a scoping and analysis exercise and is 
preparing to launch a two-year TA program focusing on gender and entrepreneurship.  
In Business Enabling Environment, IFC 
is 
initiating a “Business Start-Up 
Simplification” project which will focus on simplifying administrative procedures to 
start new businesses.  This work is linked to the planned simplification efforts under 
the Port Cities Development Program. In addition, the Government has requested 
PEP-MENA assistance to improve the policy framework for private investments in 
mining.  This work would be carried out in close collaboration with other units of the 
World Bank Group, and include assistance to the Granite and Marble Association to 
strengthen SMEs in the industry.  

• 

• 

80. Gender.   The operational mainstreaming of gender issues in human development 
will continue in the new CAS.  Outcomes for education include a focus on gender equity 
including increasing girl’s enrolment in basic education and increasing female 
completion ratios in secondary education.  Health and population outcomes also 
emphasize improvements in maternal health. Further, though there are no separate gender 
specific outcomes, improvements in water supply (particularly in rural areas) are also 
likely to primarily benefit women and girls.  The main focus of efforts for the economic 
empowerment of women will be on addressing the top ranked investment climate 
constraints; the ICA findings reveal that female entrepreneurs are affected to a greater 
extent by these top ranked constraints.  The IFC gender program will also provide 
targeted support for the economic empowerment of women (paragraph  79).  Finally, 
through periodic stocktaking (e.g. as undertaken as part of the 2006 IEG CAE and in a 
proposed FY09 Gender Report), the Bank would assess how well this mainstreaming is 
working and make recommendations for improvement.  

81. Qat.    The CAS has addressed this difficult multi-sectoral issue differentially across 
its many dimensions.  First, CAS activities that focus on improving the economic 
viability of other agricultural and off-farm activities – including through improving the 
productivity of water use - will begin to narrow the profitability differential vis-à-vis qat.  
Second, given that there is limited social consensus on the negative health and social 
impact of chewing qat, the CAS will continue to invest in the long-term process of raising 
social awareness of qat’s negative impacts.  Specifically, a survey on qat use will be 
undertaken and its findings will be used to re-engage Government and civil society on a 
public dialogue on the impact of qat.  

 
 
- 34 - 

E. Country Financing Parameters 
82. New Country Financing Parameters were introduced for use in the IDA portfolio in 
Yemen as of October 2005.   The new policy is expected to increase the flexibility of the 
use of IDA loan proceeds, reduce transaction costs to the country and the Bank, and 
enable harmonization of donor procedures around country systems.  It rests on three 
guiding principles:  (i) the expenditures financed from IDA loan proceeds are productive; 
(ii) the impact of operations financed under such credits on the borrowing country’s fiscal 
sustainability is acceptable; and (iii) oversight arrangements on the use of Bank funds are 
acceptable.   Under the new financing policy parameters, the Government will have 
flexibility in allocation of management and resources in: overall cost sharing; local cost 
financing; recurrent expenditures; and financing of taxes and duties.  Further details are 
provided in Annex 7. 

F. Lending Scenarios 

83. Indicative scenarios and triggers.  With the upcoming disclosure of CPIA ratings 
and the new IDA14 grants system, Yemen’s IDA allocation would vary annually and 
would be based on its annual Country Performance Rating (CPR).   Consequently, the 
amounts shown for FY07 and beyond are indicative only.  Actual allocations will depend 
on:  Yemen’s performance relative to the performance of other IDA countries; the 
amount of overall resources available to IDA; and changes in the list of active IDA-
eligible countries.   Further, based on these new rules, the CAS would not contain trigger-
based high-base-low cases for modulating the size of the financial envelope.  However, 
de facto such changes will occur through improvements to the CPIA and the portfolio 
performance of existing IDA projects.  It is anticipated that Yemen will use its IDA 
allocations during the CAS period in their entirety provided that the implementation of 
the Second PRSP remains broadly on track and in particular, the Government’s National 
Agenda for Reform (Box 1) is appropriately implemented. 

G. Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation 

84. Country level systems for poverty, economic and human development monitoring 
are not yet robust.  Consequently, a two-pronged strategy will be adopted to monitor 
overall results under the Second PRSP and results under this CAS.  First, a program for 
improvement to country level systems has been developed (a Statistical Master Plan) and 
the Bank will be providing Technical Assistance to ensure that the financing 
arrangements are in place and subsequently to assist the Government in supervising the 
implementation of this plan.  Simultaneously, sector and thematic monitoring systems 
have been or are being established in the context of World Bank (or other donor) projects.  
The CAS results framework has ensured that the targets for intermediate outcomes can be 
monitored based on existing systems or those that will be in place in the near future. 
Hence, for example, education information systems are already in place to gather detailed 
information on access and quality information whereas the system to monitor the 
depletion of groundwater in key basin areas is currently being put in place and therefore 
other intermediate indicators would be utilized until the new system is operational. 

 
 
 
 
- 35 - 

V. MANAGING RISKS 

85. Development effectiveness.  Given the poor performance under the previous CAS, 
low development effectiveness remains a continuing risk.  The main measures being 
taken to mitigate this risk have been noted earlier and include:  an upfront focus on 
improving governance (particularly through the National Agenda For Reform); more 
realistic targets in the CAS; and closer monitoring of the lending portfolio (which is 
already beginning to show results in FY06).  In addition to top-down accountability, the 
Bank program will also utilize strategic communications to increase demand from 
communities and civil society constituencies for greater development effectiveness. 

86. Safeguard and fiduciary risks.  At the country level, fiduciary risks remain high 
and key mitigation measures have already been designed and are under implementation 
(i.e. procurement and public financial management reforms).  Implementation will be 
closely monitored during the CAS period by both the Bank and the Government 
particularly as improvement in fiduciary systems is a key requirement for programmatic 
development policy lending.   At the project level, all new projects are reducing fiduciary 
risks by: ensuring sound 
implementation arrangements and specific capacity 
strengthening prior to the commencement of project implementation; use of specific 
disbursement arrangements and tailoring of Statement of Expenditure threshold; and 
significant percentages of project procurement being subject to prior review.  Finally, 
there is increased monitoring by Bank fiduciary staff based in the Country Office. 

87. Macro-economic risks including medium-term debt sustainability and single 
commodity risks.  As discussed in the Medium-Term Outlook section, as oil revenues 
will decline there will need to be a commensurate adjustment process in order for 
Government to maintain macro-economic stability. Measures will need to include: 
increasing 
non-oil 
revenues; 
decreasing 
non-essential 
expenditures 
and 
reducing/eliminating fuel subsidies.  The World Bank and the IMF are assisting the 
Government in identifying and implementing an appropriate package of measures.  There 
may, however, be resistance to implementing reform measures – as was the case in July 
2005.  While the risks remain high, the CAS design does address many key aspects of 
making the reforms successful (focusing on growth to increase the fiscal base; public 
expenditure management to gain greater efficiency from existing expenditures; and 
improving social protection for the vulnerable).  There also could be spillover effects on 
external debt sustainability.   As noted in paragraph  47, under the baseline scenario for 
debt sustainability analysis, all the relevant debt distress indicators stay below their 
respective thresholds.  However, stress tests show vulnerability to: lower than anticipated 
future oil prices (representing single commodity risks); and further shocks to the 
country’s weak and barely diversified export base.   

88. Reform payoffs materializing.  The medium-term projections assume that the 
Government’s program will result in increased investments from private sector investors 
(both local and foreign) responding to a more favorable investment climate.  Similarly, 
the projections also assume that higher levels of donor assistance will result from 
improved CPIA ratings.  Even if the Government implements its program well, there are 

 
 
 
 
- 36 - 

risks that the market response may be limited due to factors outside the Government’s 
control or that donors may not increase aid levels from their currently low levels. 

89. Regional/Internal Security Risks.  There are risks that regional or internal security 
conditions could put country development objectives at risk by leading to social 
instability, interruption of Government reform programs or fiscal unsustainability due to 
increased expenditures on defense and internal security.  Further, such conditions would 
also impact on the Bank’s ability to implement its programs and/or result in security 
related cost escalations.  While these risks are not considered significant at this time, they 
will be closely monitored throughout the CAS period. 

Paul Wolfowitz 
President 

by Graeme Wheeler 
Managing Director 

Washington, DC 
May 17, 2006 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

1

-

N
N
A

E

X

1

P

l
l
i

a

r

3

:

I

n

c

r

s
a
e

i

g
n

f

i

a
c
s

l

s

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

i
l
i

t

y

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

i

m

p

r

o

e
v

b
u
p
d

i
l

c

x
e

p

e

d
n

i

t

u

r

e

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

P

l
l
i

e
e
v
a

r
r
r

1

:

D

i

e
v
e
v

r

s
a

i

f

a
e
s
e
y
c
c

i

o
b
d
n
g
n

G

r

w

t
t
t

h

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

b
d

e
e

t
t

o
o
g

r

n
b
n
u
p

s
e
e
c

e

r

i
l

y

f

i
l

r

v

i

P

o

v

e

r

t

y

R

u
d
e

c

t

i

n
o

P

l
l
i

2
a
a

r

:

I

m

p

r

n
g
n
p
o
o

v

i

H

h
n
g
u
o
u
h
T

m

D

y
y
e
e
e
e
v
a
v
e

l

m

e
c
e

t

r
r
r

M

o

r

E

f
f

i

i

n

t

S

e

v

i

e
e
v
c

D

e

i
l

r

&
N

I

m

p

o

d

S

f

t

e

t

s

P

l
l
i

a

r

4

:

I

n

c

r

s
a
e

i

g
n

r

s
e

u
o

r

e
c

S

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

i
l
i

t

y

I

m

o
o
n
g
o
n
o
e
a
o
u
p
p
o
p

r

v

c

t

r
r

l

o
h

v

e

r

l

t

i

w

t

I

m

e
a
o
g
p
o

r
r

v

s
s

e
a

f

t

y

e
n

t

p

r

m

I

m

p
u
q
a
e
b

r

o

v
y
c
s

e
a
a
u
a
q
u
d
e

c
c

s
y
s

,

i
i

t

&
E

i
i
l

t

o
n
o

f

c

t

I

m

p
a
u
q

r

o

v
y

e
a
e
h
a
o
e

c
c

s
s

d
n
a

i
l

t

f

l

t

h

I

m

p
d
n
a

r

e
n
a
o

v
s

w

n
e
o
a
a

t

r

s

p
p
u

l

y

i

t

t

i

I

m

e
n
e
o
o
n
p
u
n
b
e

r

s
s
v

s
v

i
i

r

m

n
e

t

I

m

o
e
a
p
o
n
p

r

v

e

r

d
a
o

&

w

r
r

I

f

r

s

t

u

c

t

u

r

e

I

m

p

r

o

v

e

k
s

l
l
i

s

(

T

E
V

T

&

H

i

a
e
h
u
g
d

r

E

c

t

i

n
o

)

I

m

o
e
b
p
u
u

r

v
c

e

P

i
l

P

r

o

c

r

m

n
e

t

I

m
M

e
e
g
o
a
n
p
a

r

v

W

e
n
a
e

t
t

r

R

e

s

u
o

r

c

e

m

I

m

d
b
n
e
o
o
u
e
e
p
a
e
o
e
e
u
o
e
p
g
e
a
e
a
e
n
n

r

v

R

l

t

r
r

c
s
y
k

f

r

m
m

w

&

s
k
s
c
v

i
l

i
i

t

m

t

l

c
s

t

s

t

r

E
Y

M

E

C
N

S
A

R

S
E

U

L

T

S

H
C

A

I

N

P

r

i

v

e
u
d
o
e
p
a
d
n
a

t

s

c
c

t
t

o

r

i

a
n
e
o
n

c
y

r

s
v

e
e

s
s

l

n
e
e
e

v

l

s

r

i

v

i

t

f

i

t

m

t

I

m

o
e
b
n
g
p
u
a
a
n
n
a

r

v
c
c

e

P

i
l

F

i

i

n
e
a

l

M

m

t

P

e
b
u

i
l

c

S

e
o

c

t

o

r

R

f

r

m

I

m

o
d
e
n
g
p
e
a
p
n
a

r

v

e
n
e
e
u

E

x

i

t

r

M

m

t

I

m

e
n
e
u
e
n
o
a
e
p
p
e
n
a

r

v

R

v
s

T

r

r

y
c

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

1

-

N
N
A

E

X

2

Y

E

M

E

N

6
0
0
2

-

9
0
0
2

C

O

N
U

T

A
Y
R

S
S

I

S

T

C
N
A

E

S

T

A
R

E
T

G

Y

:

A
C

S

R

E

S

U

T
L

S

M

A

T

R

I

X

C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t
:

G

a
o

l

s

s
I
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

t

c

l

e

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

I

i

c

a

t

o

s

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

s

P

I

L
L

R
A

1

D

I

V

E

R

S

I

F

Y

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

T

H

R

O

U

H
G

E
T
T
E
E
B

C
R
V
R

O
G

V

E

C
N
A
N
R

E

D
N
A

E
T
T
E
B

D
R

L
E

I

V

E

Y
R

O

P
F

U

L
B

I

C

S
m
m
m
m

I

E

S

)
i
i
(

(

a

)

i
I

m
m
m

p
n

r
i

u
p
0
h
0
p
g
y
7
2
h
v
u
o

i

g
n

B

a
s

f
t
l
i

n

s
s
e

R

e

u
g

l

a
e
a
e
c

t

n
o
g
u
o
d
y
p
g
o
d

r
l
t
i
t
l
r

o
v
o
u
v
n
q
n
o
y

E

r
l
r
r
i
f
i

0
3
n
d
n
h
n
n
n
o

e

o
u
n

:
t

N

e

B
w

u

s

i

u
v
p
q
v
n

e
e
e
e
s
s
s
s
e
e
e

R

a
e

g

i

a
a
e
a
a
s
a
e
s
s
s

r
t

i
t

n
d
n
u
n
g
h
n
o
d
b
n

O

n
g
o
o
g
p
n
n
n
o
o
d
g
v
n
n
v
u
n
n
o
d

i
t
i
r
i
l
’

A

c

i
t
t
t
r
I

v

i
t
i
i
t
i

s
s
e
e

:

I

n

c
s
a

r

s
s
a
a
e
e

i

g
o
y
n
b
o
n
d
g
n
u
o

-

l
r
i

g
o

t
r

h
o

w

t
r

h

m

r
l
i

e

w

a

t

e

o

f

n
o
n

-

D
G

P

H

h
u
0
g
p
d
q
4
g
n
2

m

m

a
c

t
i

r

a
e
c

r
i
t
i

e
a

e

n

(
;
r
)
t

%

o
o

p

e

r

D
G

P

i

c
a

s

(

m
%

o

(
f

3
p
6

e

a
a
c

t
)
i

D
G

P

)

e
a

)
i
t
t

e

d

s

t

o

)
i
r
(

i
(

s

e

r
l
t
i
t
i
r
r
I
t
I
i
l
t
)

R

a
s
c
a

i

i

m

t
i
i
r

a
e
e

a
e
s
e
s
e
e
a

t

s

i
t
t

r
t

e

g

m

e

e
s

i

r

t

t

a

a

R

r
i
i
l
i

l

w

f
i
i
l
i
r
l

e
s

l

e
a
s
s
s
e
e
s
c
a
e
a
e

i
t

o
u
b
n
o

s

t

r
i

e
e
c
e
c
e
c
s
s
e
e

u
d
p
y
n
b

c

o

s

t

a

d
n

i
t

m

e

r
I
r

o
u
n
g
d

t

t
i
r
t
t

w

s
s

m

m

e
e

l
t

m

y

t

m

r

o

u
d

r

a
s
e
e

7
0
d
0
n
2

e

r

n
o

s

r

y

D

m

b

r

L

e
e

:

P

n
o

C
A
C

D

e
e
e
e
s
a
a
s
e
e
a
c
a
e
c
a
a
c

m

e

L
P
P
S

,
t
I

H

I
i
r

h
g
n

e

r

E

L

,

u
o

h

e

G

r

s
e
s
e
a
a

i
t

,

I
I

A

L
P

,

S

B

n
n

W

a

t
r

e
a
e
s
a

I
r
l

M

g

m

,
t

R

u
h

b

m

u
o
o
d
p
o
o
o
g
g
d
n
g
n
n
n
n
d
o
v
v
o
n
u
o
d
o
n
n
u
p
n
p
g
o
v
o
n
y
n
p
h
n
o
p
u
u
x
d
v
o

r

i

B

s

r
t
i
r

x
n

s
a
s
e
e
a

R

e

o
p
o
u
n
g

l

e
s
e
a
e
a
c
e

t
r
t
r

o

r

y

E

v
n
n
o

r
i
t
r
i
r
(

u
u
p
n
n
x
o
v

m

s
e
e

n

:
t

T

a

x

P

o

i
l

c

y

c
a
s
e
a
e
c
e
e
e
a
e

d
d
n
n

A

n
v
h
o
n
o
p
n
n
p
n
u
o
x
n
n
d
o
n
n
d
d
n
d
o
o
n
p
n
o

m

i

i

s
s
e
c

r
t

e
a

i
t

d
n
n
n
o

A
N

A

P
L
P

,

F
S

D

I
I
I

E

e

m
m

s
a
a
e
a
e

a

c
a
e
c
a

i
i

s

i
t

t
(
l

w

i

s
e

p

d

s
a

i

r
r
(
t
)
i
(

w

l

e
s
c
e

o
n
o
n
v

e

l

f

a
c

e

e

c

l
l

i
i
t

)

.

r
I
r
f

i
f

s
e
a
a
e

d
5
4

r
I

o
p

s
e
s

m

%

n

l

t

A
C

)

A
C

m

e

t

a
a
e
c

d
o

a
s
s
c
e
s
e

I

u
d
o
o
n
n
o

f
r
t

c

t
i
i
t

n
o
y

o

f
t
i

n
h

e

w

T

a

x

u
n
y
n
d
v
p
d
n
d
o
p
o
o
n
o
n
p

P

i
t
r
t

r

A

t

i

c

r

m

w

i

t

r

l

r
r

m

:

C

c

m

e
s
e
c

i

v

e

r

e

v

i

e

w

o

f

c

o

r

o
p

r

a

t

e

t

a

x

i
l

c

i
t
i

i
t

n
o
v
n

t
-

L

g
n
v
n
d
d
n
n

i
:
l
I
i
,
t
i
t

I

s
s
s
e
e
s
s

m
m

C

m

a

t

e

A

F

C

P
E
P
S

i
-

M

S
E

A
A
N
A

s

o

r

y

e

r

v

s
e
c

,

F

I

m

r

i

B

u

s
s
e

R

e

o
u
n
d
n
u
u
g

l

a
e
e
c
e
s
s
a
e
a
c
s
e
c

t
r
t

o

r

y

E

v
n
d

r
i
r
i
f
f

n
n
n
u
o
n
n
n
o

m

a
e
e
c
e
c
e

o
y
y
0
u
d
d
5
4
d
o
n
n
y

:
(
t

C

s
a

t

m

s

a

I

e
c
s
e
e

L

e

g
n
d
p
o
n
n
p
y

c

s

t
i
(
t
i

m
m

s
e

r

s
s
s
e
s
c
s
c
e
e
e
c

i

(

d
b
y
8
u
d
n
6
1
v

a
e
s

o
y
p

s

f
)
r

a

x

e

m

r

i

a
s
e

i
t

n
o

a

e

)
)
r
(

I

c
a

i

s

m

l
i
i
t

%

r

c
s

i
t

n
o
p

m

b

r

f

a

s

o

f

i

c
e

s

)

-
i
-

G

r
i
t
l

m

t

i
l

c

y

n
o

s

t

a

d
n

a

r

d

s

a

d
n

r
f

e

u
q

e

n

c

y

o

f

n

s

I

m

m

t

a

i
t

n
o

o

f

c

u

s

t

o

m

s

r

e

f

o

r

m

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

N

e
e

A
w

c

i
t
:
,

v

r
i
t
i

s
a
e
e
c

L
P
L

d
n

I
I
i
-
f

g
n

R

u
h
g

t
i
l
l
r

A

s
s
e
c
c
s
e

A
R

F

i

s

,

a

i

n

e

d

A

i
r

u

u

r

e

a

d
n

)
i
(

k
d

r
i
i
l
I
t
f

m

u
h
d
h
g
u
g
h
g
n
d
y
n
d
v
n
o
p
p
o
n
o
p

r

i
t
r

B

e
s
s

i

n

s
s
e

R

e

u
g

l

a

r
t
l

n
o
p
o
v
n
p
d
y
d
v
n
n
o
o
p

r

E

r
i
r

m

e

y
h
b
g
n
d
d
n

:
t
i
r

L

a
s

d
n

T

i
l
t
i

g
v
o
n

s
e
s
a
s
e
a
s
c
e

d
n

R

e

g
d
d
n
n
n
n
o
y
h

i
r

a
s
e

i
r
t

e
a
s

i
l
r
t
t
t
i
r
i
i
t
t

u
p
d
b
n
n
n
o
n
o
g
b
n
o
o
y
u
n
o
h
n
g
d
o
o
n
n
o

L

i

v
o
o
n

s
e
s
s
a
e
e
e
c
c
s
c

i
t
i
t
r
t
t
i
t

n
k
o
n
o
o
u

c

R
D

e

v

e
e
a

l
f
i

g
p
n
o
o
u
n

m
m

e

n

,
t
r
I
I

W

c
e
a
c
e

a
e
a
s
c

i
i
r
r
f

t

p
o

r
f

n
o
o

t

l

v

e

l

s

t

a

I
f

m

e
e
a
a
s
e
e
s
s
a
a
e
a
c
e
e
c
s
s
a
a
e
s
e
s
a
e
e
c
c
c
a
e

r
r
t
l
l
r

y
u
u
n
n
p

t

g
0
0
o
2
2

r

a

m

%

r
i
t

r
r
i
t

i

r

e

i

s

n
o

t
i

r

a

t

e

a

d
n

%

d
d

d
n
n

r

e

l
l
i

a

t
t

c
e

u
o

t
r

i

t

w

o

p

o

i
t
i

R

e

i

l

e
a
a

g
n
n
k
g

a

l
l
l

a
a

w

t

e
c
a
a
a

t
t
l

s
e
s
a
a
e

r
l
i
l

d
o
v

a
e
c
e

i
f

n

e

p

r
i
i
t
r
i
r
t

m
m

e
a

c

;

S

g
n

i
t
t
r
t
t

e
s
a
a
e
a
s
e

d

i
i
l
i
t
t
r
r
f
r
l
t

s

i
t
t
i

f

l

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

r
I
I
l

e

g
n

s
c
e
a
e
s
a

t

c
a
a
a
a

w

r
i
t
l
t
i
t
r

r

t

m

l

a
e

i

t
l
i
t
i
l
i

o

t

a

r
r

e
s
a
a
e
e

m

v
o
p
d
n

l
l
l

g

m

w

k

f

c
a

a

e

g

t

r

u

e
s

o

f

a

o

I

a
c
a
e

l

r
r
i

C

e

d

,
t
i

w
V
A

r
t
l

T

(
,
l
r
l
r
t

,

P

S

o
u

R

e
a
c
e

i
f
i
r
r
)
l
t

E

n

e
a
c

i
r
t

n
y
o
g

,

w
R

a
a
e

F
E
E
E

l

a

v
d
n

R

n
p
o

e

b
n

e

n

y
g

R
D

e

e

I
-
l

m

G

,

P

S

C

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

2

-

C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

s
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

t
a

c

r
l

e

d
d
h
n
o
o
g
o
k
h
h
g
g
n
h
o
v
d
k
s
d
o
n
u

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

1
y
u
u
b
o
n
n
d
d
n
v
o
u
n
o
b
u
o
p
u
I

i
r
r
t

c

a

t

o

s

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

s

)
i
i
(

(

t
r
I
t
i
t
t
f
)
i
l
i
i
t

m
m

p

i

R

s
a
a
c
c
s
c
e
s
a
s
s
s
a
e
e
c
c
a
a
a
a
s
e
e

I
t
f

n
o

r
f
f

s
a

r
I
t

c

e
e
e

1

L

n
o
o
o
y
o
p
g
n
n
o

,
l
l
i

r
t

s
s
s
e
c
s
a
a
c
e
a
c
s

l

t

m

r

t

i

o
n

o
b
v

c

m

b

i

t

o

i

a

l

r

s
e
c

m
m

r

l
r
r

s
s
e
e
c
c
c
a
e
a

s
a

s
a
a
s
e
e
e
s

r
i
t

u
d

n
d
o

i

o
u
p
p

r
l
r
r

r
r
i
f
l
i

m

r
r
i
l
t
l
r
i

a
a
s
e
s
e
c
e
c
s
s
a

r

l

a

e
s
a
a
e
a

(

g
d
o
n

g

t
)

s

i

n

R

a

l

A

P

r

m

I

m

u
v
u
p
k
o
u
0
p
d
p
o
b
n
5
n
o
u
o
9
o
o
p

r
t
t
r

e
c

n
n
n
u
d
n
u
n
p
n
y
g
o
n
o
o
n
n
y
d
v
n
d
d
d
n
o
p
n
d
p
o
b
o
o
o
d
v
o
d
n
n

i
l

c
a
e
s
a

r
f

a
a

m
m

c
e
a
s
s
e
c
e
a
a

w

d
u
n
o
h
g
u
n
o
y
d
d
b
d
h
o
d
n
o
n
o
k
n
o
o
o
n

r

a
e
c

i
r

s

:
t
i
i
t

i
i
t
t

n
u
d
n
o
p
n
n
o
n

s

i

i
t
r

d
n
o
o

a

c

s

i
t
t

r
i
t

n

t

t

r
t

c
e
c
a

f

a
e
c
c
a
e

t

f

r

r

s
a
a
a
a
e
s
a
e
s

m

a
a
c
e
s
s

e
s

a

(

m

r
f
f
r
r
t

i
r

m

r
l

r

r

o

;
)

l

n

r

e

e
c
a
c
a
e

r

e

m

a
e
e

l
t
t
t
r

f
;

r

t

r

c

r
r
i
l
t

a
s
s
a
e

e
s

t
l

s
s

t
t

i
l
.

h

m

e

n

t

o

f

m

m
m

a
s

m

o
y

m

P

i

t

t

i

r

a

r

d

N

n
o

-

L

e
e

g
n
k
d
o
n

t
i
t
r
i
l

i
i
t
i
:
t
l
r
t

G

s
a

I

n

e
c

n

i
t

v

e

F
T
L

r

c
a
e
a

m

w

S

n
y
n
d
o
u

,

n
h
d
n
v
n

i

e
a
e
e
c

A

s
a
s

s

t

a

e
c

f

o

r

R

n
n
g

s

,
t
t

I

s
s
s
e
e
s
s

t

m
m

U
C

m

a
a

e
e

A

d
p

)
i
i
(

(

b

I
r
r
t
f
r
)
l

m
m

p

r

d
g
k
n
u
n
v
o
v
y
o
p
y

r
i

P

o

w

e
s
e
s

r

I

n

r
f

s
a

r
t

u
o
n
y
o
b

a
e
c

t
r

u

r
r
i

e
e

2

L

s
e
s
s
e
c
c
s
e
c
a
a

n
u
u
p
o
o
g
n

a

s
c
e
a
a
e
e
e
a
a

e

w

r

a

i

n
n
b
g

t
i
l
i

s
e
e
a
s
a
s

i
r
t

i
r
i

&

y
g
u
n
v
g
u
o
n
n
n
n
n
d
u

t

i

t

m

t

L

A
N
w

t

l
r
r

s
e
e
c
e
s
c
a
e
e
e

(
i
f
i
r
i
t

a
c

i
t

n
o
0
4
0
n
2
n
o

r
)

a
a

t

e

i
i

M

g

%
%

d
n

r

l
i
i
f
l
r
i
i
r
t

s
e
a
a
e
c
z
a

(

)

.

S
E

i

u
o
n

t

R

w

a
e

b

l

e
a

e

r

r

r

m

i

n

d

.

M

i
l

a

d
u
u
b
n
n
d
g
o
o

l
i
r

e
s
s
a
e
e
s
s
a
e

o
p

w

s
s
a
e
e
e
e
e
e

r

p
d
p
u
u

l

y

m

n
h
g

m
m
m

r

e

h

f
l
i
r
r
t
j
t
r

e
c
a
a

r
i
i
t
t
f
)
t
t

c

t

o

r
r
l
r
l
(

a
s

i
t

s
c

,

a

l
f

y
g
u
p
p
u
u

s

p
d
d
n

o
u
b
d
n

e
e
e
s
c
a

d

s

a
s

l
i

i
f
r

r
i

r
i
l

n

e

&

e
c
e
a

n

P

w

P

p
o

I
r

m

d
d
n
n
u
n
v
d
n
o
u
p
n
h
d
g
d
o
n
n
o
n
n
p
h
b
h
y
y
g
g
v
o
n
d
o
n
n
g
o
o
n
n
p
n
n
d
o
h
p
d
b
o
n
g
n
o
u
n
o

e

u
d

e
a
c
a
s
s
s
e
a
a
c
e
s
e
a
a
e
e
e
c
e
a
e

l
r
t

i
f
i
r
r
t

a
c
s
a
e
e
s

i
t

n
o

s
e
e
e
a
e

t

f

r
r
t
l
r

l

D

m

e
s
a
c
e

d
n

v
n
u
y
d
n
g
u
o
p

o

f

r

w

r

)
i
I
(

m

p

r
r

v
u
o
g

a
c
e
e
a

o
d

r
i
l
r
t
t

e

g
y

a
a

r
l
r
l

e
e
a
c
e
a
a
a
a

g
d
n
n

r

y
b
b
y
o
n
y
d
o
g
o
v
n
o
u
g

l

e
s
a

t
t

r
t

r
f

a
a
e
e
e
s
a
e
a
a
a
e

m

w

o
b

r
i
l

6
0
d
0
h
d
n
2
n
k
h
y
n
b

t

r

h
g
u
o

:

e

l

m

e

i
l
t
r

e
e
e
s

a

)
t
i
f
i
(

e

r

n

a
e

w
N

E

l

e
a
a
e
c

l
t
i
r

y

w

p
p

r
i
f
i
r
t
l

P

m

;
t

i
t

n
o
6
0
d
v
0
n
n
u
2

)
i
l
i
i
i
t
(

R
R

u

E

l

e
a
c

t
i
r
i
t
.
t
r
)
r
t

S
S

r
r
t
t

t
t

y
y
g
g

;

n
n
n

w

v
n
7
0
0
2
b
n
d
n
n
o
o
o
o
n

e

E

i
(

)

a

A

c

n
n
o

P

r
r
l
t
i
l
i
t
f
i
t
r
t

i
(

I
r

e
c
e
e
e
s
e
c
a
s
e
a

t

m

s

m

e

l
t

a
e
e
s
s
c
e
s

e
e
s
c
e
e
s

n
d
o
h

a
e
e

t
i
f
i
l

v

e
e

r
r

y

s

y

s

t

e

m

s

i

n

r
l
i

/
l
t

l

a
e
a
c
a
s

i
i
t
t

o

r

.

P
P
P

d
b
o
b
u

m

o
n
o
v
d
n

d
y
h

m

w

d
n

e

n

e

r

y
g

a

d
n

V

S

H

m

S

t

m

e
s

.

i
l

i

s
e

m

t

s

i

n

g

i
r

o
p

w

r

s

p
p
u

l

y

.

D

o
o
o
o
o
p
p
n
v
o
n
h
p
p
o
g
o
u
u

r
i
r
i
r

A

c
s
e

i
r
t
r

v
o

i
I
,
t
t
t
i
j
,

s
e
c
s
e

I
:
,
t
l

E
F

D
U
A

i
f

s

c
e
e

p
u
o
p
p
u
o

A
D

t
l

c
e
e
e
e

a
a

m

i

c

c
e
e
e
s
s
s

r
t
t
,
r
r
l
r

m

n

B

o
h
p
n
k
d
n

w

e

r

t

j

F

-
l
r
t
i
-

e
c
e
s
e
s
e
e
a
c
c
e

c

&

d
b
n
u
o
p
d
x
u

U

S

t

o

i
t
-
t
t
j

t

o
n

i
f
i
r
t

r

f

r

m

Y

e
s

i
f

d
o

e

d
d
n

D

r

T

r

u

F

r

L

a

(
i
l
)
t
i
i
i
(

a
c
c

I
i
)
i
r
t
r
i
l

m

k
p
o
v
n
o
g
o
d
n
n
g
v
o
n
n
n
k
o
d
n
o
p
u
d
v
n
g
n
n

t
r

v
o

i

S

l
l
i
t

s

T

h

r

T

r
i
-
r
r

l

E

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

V

o

a
a
c

i
t

n
o
o
n
u
n
d
o
n
n
d
k
o
u
n
n

e
e
a
a
c
c
s

l
l

T

r

a

i

n
d
n

i

o
n
g
o
n

P

b
u

s
e
e

m
m

e
a

t

m

a
c
e

b
n
p
h
g
h
u
v
g

r

r

c
e
e
s
s
a
e
e

t

l
t
f
;

i
i

e
e
c
c
a
e
e
a
c

t
i

y
v
n

;
t

p
n

i
r

a

r

l

m

a
c
c
e
e
a

i

i
t
l
i

c
a
s

f

e

f
l
f

r
i
t

e

m

m

f

r

e

m

p

y
o

p

i
t
r

i

n
o

.

E

m

l
i
i

i
i

i
i
r
t
r
r
t
t

s
a
c
e
s
a
a
e
s
e
e
c
c
s
e
e
a
e
e
c
a
a
a
e
e
c
a

r
t
i
t

m

b
u
p

i
l

c

i

e
s

f
i
i
i
t
r
t
r

.

S

t
t
i

e

y
v

i
i
r
r
i
r
r
f
t
t
,
t

e

c
a
e
a
a
s
e
a

t

g
o
n
n
n
g
n

r

i
t
t

i
-
i
l
i
l

e
c
a
e
e
e
e
s

e
c

m

t
i

(

b

e

s

t

t

o
b

S
P

V

i
t

a

l

T

n

i

g
n

r

j

)
t

F

i

t
i

a

c
e

m

i

c

a

n

a

l

y

s

i

s

o

f

t

h

e

c
e
s

t

o

r

c

p
o
d
o
v
n
n
u
v
d
v
y
d

.

S

i
l
l
r
i
t

D

e

l

m

e

g
o
o
p
g
n
n
v
n
p
v

t
i
r

F

d
n
u

w

l
l
r
t
i
t

h
p
o

d
p
y
o
o

s
a
e
s
e
e
a
e

r

i
i
t
r

p
n
n
o
h
n

a

l
.

a

m

e

r
r
t
l

a
e

t
t

e

c
e
e
s

i

I

c

e
e
s
s
a
e

i
i
r

e
a

m

f
r

m
m

r

e

w

p

r

e

-

a

n

-

e
c

i

n

i

r

a

s

.

1

O
O

u
u

t
t

c
c

o
o

m
m

e
e

s
s

s
s

o
o
p
p
p
p
u
u

r
r

t
t

o
o
b
b

t
t

g
g
h
h

r
r

o
o

w
w

t
t

h
h

a
a

u
u
h
h
d
d
n
n

m
m

a
a

n
n

d
d

e
e

v
v

e
e

l
l

p
p
o
o

m
m

e
e

n
n

t
t

u
u
o
o

t
t

c
c

o
o

m
m

e
e

s
s

2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

3

-

C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

o
b
s
h
v
k
n
s
g
o
o
v
o
o
s
o
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

t

c

l

e

k
o
n
g
y
n
n
o
v
o
s
u
p
q
u
n
d
g
o
n

A
C

S
H
d
n

O

u

t

c
r
E

o

m

e

s

/

v
u
n
d
d
h
n
g
y
n
n
g
g
u
h
n
g
v
u
h
o
g
h
I
g
u
o

i

c

a

t
e
e

o

d
u
n
q
n
p
n
u
o
d
h
o
s
d
n
n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

s

f
)
i
i
l
i
i
r
i
(

(

i
I
i
i
f
)
r
r
r
r
)
i
r
r
i
t
t
t
i
r
t

I

m

r

i

S

l
l
i

s

T

h

r

r
i

r

a
c

i
r
t

n
o
o

H

s
e
e
s
e
s
c
a

e

a
e
e
a
s
s
c
a
a
s
e

t
i
l
i
t

t

d
p

e

t
l

.

L

s

r
t
t

o
g
y
n
u
g
u
u
q
v
v
g
n
n
y
u
v
g
n
v
v
o
o
o
o
u
v
q
n
p
o
u
o
n
v
n
v
d
d
n
n
o
o
u
n
o
n
b
p

i

c

i

e
s

r
i

n
o

t
l
i
.
i
i
t
l
t
i
l

C

a

i

a
s
e
s
e

s
e

i
t
(

)
i

m

p

r

i
t
i
i
t
f

e
c

.
t

H

i
r
t

e
e

a
e
c
e

i
t
l

e

f

r
t
i

m

s
c

e
c
e
e
c
s
a
e
a
e
s
e
e
a
a
a
e
e
a
a

t

a
s
e
e
c

w

h

i

i
f

a

,

r
r

c
a
e

t
i
l

y

c
a
c
s
s
a
a

m

a

i

m

s

f

u

l
l

y

i
t
r
r

l

t

k
p
g
d
o
d
h
d
d
g
0
v
0
o
g
0
g
p
d
0
n
9

A

p
v
p
d

l
r

p
o
p
v
n
o
o
v

a

l

n
o

t
f

a

s

r
t
r
t

a

t
r

s
a
e
e
a

g

i

c

p

l

a

n

a

d
n

m

u

-
i
t
l

y

a
e

r

e

e
e

m
m

e

p
d
n
n

n
n
g
d
o
p

m

-
f

D

e
a

l

e
a

l

a

v
d
n
n
u

r
i
l

k
n

s
e
e

d

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

g
d
u
b

e

t

s

o

r

S

a

’

a

A

i

e

s

i
t
i

(

a

m

i
t
r

R

a

r

y

F

m

w

r

a

u
d
u
d
n
o

P

b
v
u
g
u
o
o
p

i
t
i
l
i

c

f
I

v
n
o
n
y
n
o
p
b

s
e

t

m

e

n

t
f
f

e
a
s
a
c
a
c
c
e
e
c
s
e
s
s
s
a

i
t
i
i
t
t
i
r
i
i
l
t
r
i
r
t

o
n
o
n
o
v
n

K

e
e

y

S

c
c
e

t
i
r
i
t
f
r
f
r

n
p
o
o
n
y
u
p
o
p
n
o
h
o
n

t
i
r
t
r
i
I
r
i
r
r
i
r
I
r
t
:
t
r

e
e
a
a
s
a
e
c
s

g

a

a
e
a
e

d
g
g

A

g
n
o
n
o

i
r

a
e
c
a

h
g
u
n
d
u
b

t
l

r

e
e
e
a
s
a
e

L

w

e
c
c
e

r

r
f

m

a
a

a

a
e
a
e
s

m
m

a
a
c

i
r

n

e
e

d
n
n
p

i
l

o
n

w

f

i
t
i

l

e

m

t
t

a

d
n

g
n
o

t

e

i
r
r
i

a

r
,
i
i
r
r
r
r
I
i
i

n

r
i
r
r
t

c

r
i
r
f
t

t

e
c
a
s
a
e

s
e
s
c
a

t
l

e
s

e
e
s
a
a

t

e
a
a

r
t

l
t

d
n
n
n

j
i
r
r
(
r
I

c
a
e
e

i
l

n

e

a

t
r

e
e

i

)
t
i
t

I

m

m

t

P

E

P

a
s

o

y

i
t
i
t
r

M

m

e

n
h
n
d
o

t
r

o

o

s
e
e
s

t

r
i
l

t

h
g
d
u
n
o

f

o

r

m

S

e
e
c
s
e
c
a
s
c
e

m

W

e
a
s
a
a

U

r

F

i
t

s

a

W

a

U

s
e
e
e
a
e
s

A

i
i
t

i
t

P

b
u
g
n
n

i

v
d
n
u

i
t
f
f
l

m

s

t

r

e

b
h
n
g
g
h
h

a

r
t
i
r
’
i
l
i
r

s
a
a
e
a
c

i
t
t

n
n
n
o
u
u
b
u

I

c

r
r
t
i
t

c

f
i

d
h
n
n
n

i

e
a

i
r
r

s

t

o

a
e

n
u

t
l

r

w

e
s
s

f
t

e
e

S

a

.

i
i
(

v
v
o
g
o

)

(

u
g
n
v
d
p
n
o
k
u
g
g
o
d
d
y
d
n
x
d
y
n
n
n
g
n
p
o
g
v
v
n
v
y
p
o
n
o
n
n
g
d
d
u
u
k
p
n
u
p
n
n
q
u
n
g
k
d
n
d
o
k
v
u
o
o
p
u
o
o
b

l
t
)
l
f
t
i
r

I

m

p

r

v
o

i

g
n

R

e

u
g

l

a

t

o

r

y

F

r

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

a

d
n

P

b
u

i
l

c

I

v
n

s
e

t

m

i

K

y

S

:

R

a

i

d

A

t
l

e

a

d
n

L
L

e
e
c
e
s
e

w

e
a
a
e
z
s
s
s
e
e

i
t
r
l
f

m

f
r
f
i
r
r
(
i
f
r
r
t

a

n
o

f

e

d

a

i
r

c

o
p
u
o
u
o
o
y
v
d
k
p
k
o
h
v
v
o
v
n
n
p
o
o

i
r
r

r

u

m

l
l

w

e

a

e

i
t

s
e

;

c
a

a

i

i
t
r

p
o
o

r
r
r
i
i
(
l

e
c
s
a
s
e
e
s
c
c
c
e
c
s
e

m

c
s
c
a
c
e
e
s

t
r
t
l

s
s
e

t
(
r
i
l

t

,
t
i
t
i
i
r
l
)

h

a

h
u
o
k
g
v

o

a

i

a
s
e
c
a
e
e
e
s
e
e

I
r
f

v
n

s
e
e
s
s
e
e
a
e
e
c
e
a

r

d
o
o
p
g
h
p
h
o
v
u
g
u
u
o
o
h
o
h
d

e
s
s

t
r
l

u
n

r
t
r
i
f
f
r
t

e
s
a
c

o
d
h

r
r

n
u

r
i

a

l

m

i
l
i

o
g
u
d
d
v
d
n
n
o
g
o
y
d
k
k
p
b
n
o
n
d
p
o
d
n
u
p
n
d
d
n
n
b
u
u
d
n
g
b
k
d

i

e
a
e

s

r
r
i
l
)
l
t
f
t

m

a

i
r

e
c
e
s
a
e

t
l
i
l

&

c
s
e
s
e
e

t
t

o

b
g
k
o
n

(

e

p
d
n

e
a

i
t
t

e

i
f

n

r
r
i

i
j

m

m

n

A
R

L

w
D

c
a
e

r
t
r
f
f
I
t
r

m

p
u
d
y
o
v
h
v
n
o
g
p
u
p
o

r

a
e
c
c
e
e
c
e
s
e
e
e

d

i
l
f
f

o

l

n
p
v
o
u
o
o
o
p
n
g
g
d

i
l
i
l

s
a
c
s
a
s
a
s
a
s
s
c
e
e

y

r
f
t

m

c
a
e
e
c
s

w

n
v
n
p
u
d
g
n
d
n
o
n
n
n
o
o
v
o
v
o
n
g
u
5
o
k
n
d
n

r
i
i
i
t
t

k

a
s
s
e
c

i
i
l

a
e
s
s
c
a
e

i
t
i
,
t
i
r
t
i
r
t

u
n
y
o

n
o

s

h

i

r
t
r

o

r
i

e

e

c
e
e
a

r
i
t
i
l
r

w

r

,
i
r

f

g
n

u
v

f
r

f

-

e

a

r

r

o

s
s
e

i

l

i

e

r

a

t

.

)

I
I
i
f
r
)
f
r
t
)
i
t
r

m

i
i
t
r

R

l

t

o

r

y

F

r

a
s
e
e
e
e
s
e
e
a
a
e
e
s
e
a
e
a
s
a
c
e
z
s
a
s

m

P

b
g
v
u

i
t
l
i

s
a
s
c

I

v
n

s
e

t

m
m

e

n
v
o
g
p
u
o
n
d
0
o
2
o
g
p
n
o
n
n
y
g
o
y
p
n
y
n
b
n
o
n
d
d
g
o
v
g
v
n
g
g
n
o
o
u
n
o
n
o
p
n
p
v
p
n
n
n
n
x
u

t

s

i
r

K

e

S

c
c
e

t

g
9
0
p
n
h
7
o
h
g
o
u
o
n
o
y
h

r
r
f
r
l
t
i
l

a
s

:

F

i

s
e

d
n
n
o
o
d
n
n
u
v
v
k
o
h
o
h

e

i
r
r

c
s
s
a
e
e
a
s
c
e
c
e
e
e
e
s
s

L

w

e
a
a
a
e
c
c
a
a

r
t

i
i
l
f
i
i
(

c
s
a

l

r

c

,

s
e
a

c
s
e

m

m

n

,
t

t
(
i
r
t
)
f

t

t
r
i
r
l
r

s

o
v
k
o
o
u
d
k
h
d
g
n

a

c
a

t
i

y

I

n

r

r

a
c
e

i
i
f
t
i
r
.
t
r

y

m

r

c
s
a
e
a
a
e
a
a
c
e

s
e

(
t
i
f

h
p
h

i

i
r

)
t
f
r

h
n

e
e

r

b

i
r
i
l

t
j

e

s

F
F

r
i

h

P

r

r
r
I

e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e

m

G
w

r
i
i
t
;

m

p

l

e

m

s
e
a
e
e
s
e
a
a
e
e
s
s
e
c

n
h

i
t
r
r

i
t

n
o

a

a
a
s
a
e
s
a
a

m
m

e
e

l
t
t

s

r

a

t

e
s

F

i

M

P

a
a
c

s
s
s
c
e

;

i
r
f

s
a
s
e
s
a
a
a

t
i
i

m

i
r
l
f
l
r

e

i
t
t
i

a

n

r

d

i

t
i
r

m

t

i

i

.
t

m

i
i

R

e

u
g
p
o

t
l
r

a

t

o
y

r

y

m
m

w

y
o
d
o
v
o
u
p
g

r
f
l
r

P

b
o
u
d
n

i
l

c

I

v
n

s
e

t

m
m

e

t

K

S

c
a
e
s
e

t
i
t

:

G

S

n
o
o
p
u
u
o
o
b
g

i
t
l
r
r

L

c
a

a
e
c

f
r
l

r
r
r
t

e
s
e
e
c
a
a

i
r

l
t

c
a
s

g
g

e
s
s
a
a

t
t

d

a

m

k

.

I
r

l
r

e

l

a
e

e

a

t

r

m

w

r

k

I

e
a
a
a
z

m

t
r

a

l

d
n

r

a
a

t

i
r
t
r

y

r
f
i

a
a

m

e

w

k
n
o
n
o
o
d

r

t

o

e
e

c

i
t
i
t
r
r

e

i
i
r
t

t
,

t
i
r
t

c
a

p
d
n

i
t

i

l
i
l
i
t

,

r

c

d

i

m

s
e

i
t

c

f

s
a

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
-

4

-

C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

s
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

a
e
t
e
c
e
c
a
J

c

l

e

n
o
n
b
g
n
u
o
v
h
d
s
o
g
n
p
h
7
o
h
o

A
C

S
d
m
n

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

I
F
P

i

c

a
w

t

o

o
d
s
n
g
o
n
k

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

s

i
(

b
v
o
p
g

)

)
r
(

i
t
I
t
i

m

r

i

R

e

u
g
k

l

a
e
e

t

o
p

r

y

i
r
r

a

c
e
s
a
e
e
e
a
s
e

o

r

a

P

b
u

t
i
i
t
l

c

I

v
n
n
n
o

s
e

t

m
m

e

v
n
o
p
u
d
n
n

t

s

i
r

K

e

o
y
p
d

S

c
e
c
e
a

t

v
u
n
d
o
d
n
y

r
r
f

s
e
s
a
s
e

:

w
U

r

n
k
n
o
b
p
o

a

M

a
a

u
u
h
g
n
u
u
o
n
d
h
n

f
i
r

c
a
s

i
i
r
t
r
t
t
i
t

g
n
u
n
o
g

s
e

t

w
w

i

r

a

r

o

t

h

f

%

v
v
u
d
d
o
n

t

t
i

r

e
c
a
a

m
m

m

e
e

t

t
i

l
i
r
t

p
o

t

l

s
a
e

l

s
e

t

t

r
t
r
I
f
i

a
e

I
t
t
r
i
l
t
f

m

e

r

a
s

i
t

y
n
o

e
e
s

i
r
t

i
r
l

s
e

i
i
r
l
t
t

m

s
e

i
t
i
t
t
t
t
t
r

e

l

r

a
a

m

w

o
g

o
v
k
n

a

l

E

s
e
s
e
c
a

S

t

i

c

s
e

m

e

o
p
n

c

l

u

s

t

e

r

s

P

I

L
L

R
A

2

:

C
C
A

E
L
E

A
R

T

I

N

H
G

U

M

D
N
A

E

V

L
E

O

P
P

M

T
T
E
E

D
N
V

H

R
A

O

N
Y
U

H
G

M

O

R

E
E

F
F

I

C

I

E

N

T

S

E

V
R

I

C

E

D

L
E

I

V

E

D
N
A
Y
R

I
u
q
d
n

M

R

O

S

F

T
E

T
E

S

)
i
(

I

m

p

r

v
o

i

g
n

s
s
e
c
c
a

,

e

u
q

t
i

y

a

a

t
i
l

y

o

f

B

s
a

i

c

E

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

O

o
g
n

i

g
n

A

c

i
t

v

i
t
i

s
e

I

m

v
p
p
h
y
b

r

g
g
u
n
p
n
n
v
o
g
v
n
o
o

i

H

d
n
v
v
u
o
n

m
m

e
a
a
a
s
e
a
e

n

D

e

e

l
r
l
i
l
l
i

m

e
e
s
s
e

t
l
t

s
a
s
e

u

r

e

d

r

w

t
l
r

c
a

s
e
e
a

i

r

M

i

m

D

p
o

m

e

n

t

G

o

A

t
l

h
g
n
u
o
h
n
v

s
a
a
e
e
s
s
s
e
c
s
a
c
e
a
e
a
e
s
e
a
c
c
s
a
a
s
c
e
e
c
a
e
a
e
a
e

n

r
i

g
o
n

l

m

n

t

v
y
h
d

a

e

d
n
p
d
u
n
o
n
b
u
n
g

e
e

r
i

r
l

t

l
i
i
l
f
i

l
l
t
i
,
t

i
t

o
n
g
g

s
a
c
s

d
d
n
p
g
v
v
y
n
n
o
d
o
y
h
y

i

r
i
t
i
r
i
r
i
.

S

i

n

e
s
e
a

r
i

i
l
l

s
a
e
a
s
a
s
s
e
a

i

n
o
o
k
v
p
n
d
d
u
n

l

a
a

t
r
r

e
s
a
a
a
e

m

g
d
d
n
n
o
g

.

Q

t
i
r
l

r

a
e

m

t
)
i
i
l
i
i
l
(
i

r

t

r
l
r

a

m

h

h
g

t

i
r
f
i
i
t
i
i
l
r
i
l
i
r

w

g
o
n

.

I

m

g
v
u
n
o
q
n
o
p
d
n
n
5
n
n
4

r

t
i
l
i

y
g
n

s
s
s
s
s
s
e
e
a
c
e
c
a

,

a
e
c
e

y
n
y
o
u
b
q

t
i

a
a

a

o

f

4
g
8
o
o
u
u
n
d
o
o
o
g

i
t

&

i
r
I
I
r
-
t

r
r
i
l

s
a
s
s
e
e
a
a
e
e
e
e

m

r

d

:

c

t
i
i

o
g
g
n
n
n
n
o
n
9

i
t
r
i
t
r
l

e

m

r

a

t

%

-

c

a

f

l
r
i

s

t

o

%

d
u
b
d
u
o
b
u
p
p
o
d
o
h
n
n
d
o
v
o
d
o
p
0
o
5
p
y
o
o

f

r
f

m
m

s
e
e
a
a

t

s

.

-

G

r

a

e

l
i
t

c

%
m

l

i
t

r

o

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

t
i
l
I
t

C

n
o

s

r
t

u

c

i
t

o
n
o

f

3

,

3
9
2

c
s

o
o
h

l

s

;

R

e

h

a

b

t
i
l
i

a

i
t

o
n
o

f

2

,

0
0
1

c
s

o
o
h

l

s

;

R

e

r
t

n
o
d
1
u
8
2

i
t
t
-
t
t
i
f

2
9
2
3
h
g
n

,

c
s
a

b
u
o
p
o
h
o

l

s

f
i
l

o

r

t

h
o
o
h
h

e

s
a

n
d
n

i
i

e
e
s
a
e
a
c
c

p
p

d
d

;

S

t

e

c
a
e

e

r

r

i
t

(

c

c
s

l

)

r

t

o

:

;

N

n
o

-

w

a

g

e

e

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

s
e

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

t

o

0
2

%

o

f

r

c
e

u

r
r

e

n

t

s

p

e

d
n

i

g
n

;

I

n

c

l

u

s

i

v

e

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

n
o

m

i

s
s

i

n
o

s

t

a

t

e

m

e

n

t

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

e

d

.

L

e
e

d
n
v
u
u
d
d

i
i
t
t
i
l

n
n
o
o
g
p
n
o

A

c
e

,
i
t
t

p
v
v
x
n

i
t
i

c
s
s
s
e
a
e
a
e

:
i
i

C

h

l
i

d

D

a
a
e
c
c
a
e

m

B

E
E

E

n
o
p
o
o
o
p
o
n
p
n
u
d
y
o
k
h
p
p
o
o
p
u

,

B

s
a

i

c

D

e

f
l

m
m

e

n

,
t

H

t
l

v
h
o
p
p
b
u
u
o

T
S

c
e

r
r
i
t

R

r
i

S

l
,
t
r

S

c

a

r
i
,
l
t

F

d
n
u
d

f

r

D

e
c
a
e
a
a

e

m

e
s

j
,
t
r

T

h

P

r
i
l
t
l
t
i
r

W

r

P
L
P
P

c
e

U

r

b

a

n

W

S

l
r

A

d
n
h

e
s
a

I

,

R

n
u

W

a

t

e

S

l

y

a

I

m

n
g
p
u
u
n
o
y
h
d
n
b
d
k
d
o
g
u
d
b
v
p
p
p
u
h
q

i

A

s
s
e
c
a
c

e
s
a
s
e
c
e
a

d
n
u

Q

u

a

f

H

s
s
s
a
e
c
c
a
a
e
e

t
l

h

S

a

i
t

n
o

L

s
s
e
a
c
e
c
a
c
a
s
c
a
e
c
a
a
s
e

t

o

d
n
v
h

o

f

h
y
o

t
l

h
u
d

e
s

l
r
t

i

,

t
i
f
l
t
l
,
l

e
e
a
a
e

r
t

u
n
g
q
h
o
y
d
p
o
n
d
d
h
n
p
h
n
h
o
h
d
b
p
d
h
v
n
h
d
h
n
n

o
o
d
p
n

r

m

t

a

s
e
e
e
c
s

a
e
e
c
e
a
a
c
s
a
c
c
s
a
e
s
e
e
c

r

e
a
a
e

t
l

i

e
e

e
a
a
a

i
t
t

o
o
d
o

i

m

l

m

t
r

n
o

f

i
l
r

a
e

r
t
i
l
t
l
i
i
r
t
l
l
i
r

r

m

s

t

a

c
a

m
m

t
i

s
e
s
a
e
s

t
f
f

e
c
e

r
i
t

o
n
h
d

f

m

o

h

s

a

e

.

m

r
r
r
i
i
l
r
i
r
t

t
i
i
l

h
h
d
n
u
v
h
n
h
o
o

a
a
e
e
a

u

a
s
a
s
a
e
e
a
a
c
z
e

i
t

f

c
c

t
t
l
l

e
s

g
v
o

p

m

f
r
t
l
,
l

c
e

e
s

m

a

t
l
i
:

n
h
d

r

s
a
c
e

i
t

a
e
e

d
n
d

c

d
n
o
o
h
y
h
n
b
b

.

s
a

m

r

%

f
r
f
l
r
i

b
5
u
v
y
b
3
5
d
0
2
b
y
5
v
2
b
o
y
1
o
p
d
n
u

l
l

-
i

m
%
%
m
m

d
h
o
n
o
n
u

i

e
z

c

s
s
e
e
e
e
e
s
a
e
e
e
e
e
c
c
e
s
a
a
e
e
c
s
a

t
r
f
(
)
r

s

i

m

a

i
i
i
l
r
l
t

n

i
f
t

.

C
R

P

e

a

l

e

n

e
c

e
e
s
a
a

t

n
n
g
n

r

%

(

u
b
d
g
o

t

r
t
t

a

i
t
l

s

g
d
n
h
u

e

i
r

R
H

P
S

r

c

i
r

)

.

I

n

p
o

r
f
r

d
o

j

c
e
e
e
s
a
e

t
i
l

i

5
o
u
y
h
d
d
y
h
g
n
n
b
d
p
n
v
u
b
d
d
o
n
h
u
o
h
d
n
b

t
i
r

s
e
e

r

v

e
a

n

r
t
i
i
r
t
f
t
(
t

d
n
h
d
o
o
n

e
s
s
s
a
s
a
e
a
e
e
a
s
a
a
a
e
e

r

:

%

e

e

y
b
b

k

l
l
i
i
l
t

e
e
e

h
2
g
2
b
n
n
b
o
d

t
r
i

a

t
i
.
t
)
i
i
l
t

e

d
n

a

n

t

s

i

n

c

%

m

u
u
n
d
n
o
5
u
n
y
v
g
b
n
d

i
f
(
l
i
i
r
i
(
t

%

%

o

f
t

e
s
e
e
e
a
s
s
a
e
e
e
a
a
c
a
e
s
s
e
a
e

l

d

s

w

t

l

e
c
s
e
a
s

c

d
n

e
e

-
t

r
t

e

t

I
(

T

N

i
l
l
)
i
i
i
r

i

n
g
n

c

%

b
o

e

t

i
l

R
H

P
S

t
r

a
s
e

r
t

c

t

i
i
l
.
t
)

I

n

r
r
t
t
r

a
s
c
s
e

a
c

l

e
s
s
s
e
c
a
c
e
e
a

o

e
a
s
z
a

n
n
o

d
n
o

f

m

r
t

l

e
a

d
b
h

h
h

t
l

u
h
d

r

i

s
e
c

b

e

a

t
r

u
g

t
t

t
.
)

s

d

i
r

R
H

P
S

c

i
r

 N

n
o

r
-
I
t

T
L

c
e
e

g
n
n
h
d
n

i

A

c
a
c

i
t

v

i
i
t
i

a
s
e
s

:

W
W

a

e

i

l

A

s
s

t

n

e
c

,

B
 N

e
e
e

A
w

c

i
t
:

n
o
v

i
t
i

s
a
e
c

L

d
n
v

i
l

g
p
n
o

S

i
,
t

l

D

e

m

e

P

R

S

C

I
-

I
t
t
i
)
f
i
i
i
(

m

n
p
n
d
y

t
r

g
g
p
o
n
o
p
v
o

r
i

S

a
a
a
e

f

e
s

t

y

N

e
e

t

P

r

r
I
t

a

m
m

s

S

a

e
e

e

r

m

a

r

i
l

m

i

c
s

d
n

p
g

i
t
r

d
g
n
v
o

e

a
s
s
a

f

s
a
e
e

t

u
n
y

e
e

t
r

a

r

e

m

d

y
b

u
p
o
0
4

e

r
r

s
e
e
c
c

o
o
g
n

t

t
f

S

o
o
o

c

i

s
e
a

l

F

d
n
h
u

f

o

r
i

D

e
c

v
o

e
e

l

p
d
o

m

s
e
e
c
e

n

t

r

s
e

l

w

t

t

r

e
e

n

m

l
i

N
A

n
o

t
-
i

L

e
a

d
n
n

i

n
g
o
n

:

T

c
e

n
h
d

i
r

a
c
e

l

s
s

s

e
c

C

h

l
i

n

&

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

5

-

C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

s
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

t
a

c

l

e

d
v
o
o
p
o
n
g
s
p
d
n
o
n
u
d
n
g
n
g
n
o
g
n
k
g
u
v
d
o
n
u
u

A
C

S
d
n
m

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

I

i

c

a

t

o

u
o
o
s
o

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a
Y

n
k
n

P

r
r
e
T

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

n
y
s
h

e
e
e
c
a
a
c

i
r
t

e

a

e
e
e
e

t

r

i

m
m

r

m

s
c
a
e
e
e
s

n
n
h
h
d

t
i
l
r
i
t
i

L

f
t

a
a
a

c

f
r
f

v
o

s
e
s

r
i
t
t

s

r
i
t

i
t

-

s
s
c

e

b

y

i

s
e

c
a
a

v
g
n
o
o
u
g
o
n
o
p

r
r
t

d
o
d
d

f

l
r
t
i
r
i
t
t
r
i
t
f
i

s
e

r

s
s
e
e
c

r
t
i
i

s

f

a
z
c
e
e
s
e
s
e
a
e
e
a

a
c
e
e

l

w

t

t

h

r

e
e

n

m

a
s
e
e

d
g
n
n

m

r

g
n
o

i
t

a
c

t
r
t

i
i
r

S

t
r

a
a
s
a

m

e

w

o
y

r
i

o
u
k

t

a
a

p
d
d
d
n

d

d
n
0
n
p
b
2
o
y
y
g
p
n
b
3
n
p
o
o
n
d
7
u
o
n
v
o

t
i
l
i

s
s

s
e

6

.

y
o
p
p
8

e

r

e
e
c

n
n

t

i
t

h
n

c

r
r

e
s
a
e

i

n
h
g
u
o

i

n

c

p
o

m

e

r
r
f

o

m
m

s

o
h

t
-
t
r

e

r

m

e

m

l

m

t

P

W

P

r

g
o

a

u
u
o
o
n
o

i
t

h

,

c
e

i
,

c
a
c

l

A

s
s
e
a

i

s

t

a

n

e
c

D

a
s
c
s
e

d
n
p
b
o

t
i
l
i

S
S
E

o

i

l

P
S

r
t

t
t

i
t

W

,

G
Y

d
n
9
0

e

r

a

U

a

t

e

(

F

)

,

W

B

I

i
(

n
v
o

)

I

m

p

r

v
o

r
t
i

g
v
o
n

W

a
e
e
a
s
a
e
c

r
r
t

S

p
p
u
d
n

l

y

S

t
i
i

L

w

e
s
s
s
e
c
c
a
a

w

t

a
s

t
i

i
t

n
o

i

I

m

r
r
i

a
s
s
s
e
c
a
c
a

t

u
n
o

r
t
i

b

a
a

n
n
o

w

s
s
s
e
s
e
c
s
c
e
e
c
a
c
e
e
s
s

t
r

l

i
t

v

%

A

i
t

i

m

r

o
d
d
u
v
v
o
o
n
v
p
o

e

w

a

t

e

r

r

v
8
6

i

c

r

e
s
a
e

r
l
f
r

m

%

t

o

m
%

i

r

a
e
s
e
c

a

r

s
a
e

.

A

a
e
s
s
s
a
a
a
e
e
c
c
c
a
s

t

i

i
r

d

n
n
n

t
i
r
r

i
t

e
s

r

i
i

r
f
r

m

0
2

%

t

o

0
3

%

u

r

l

s
a
e

L

d
d
o
n
n

a
c

l
i
f

w

a
a
a
e
c
a
a
a
a

t

l
l
r
l
i
l
l

v
d
n
y
h

a
a
s

n
b

t
i
l

a
e

i
t
i

n
o
n

a
c
a

o
n

’
r

o
p

r

a
a

i
i
t

n
o

s

s
e

t

a
e

d
b

i
l

s
a

h
h

e

d

a
a

n
k
u
y
u
n
g

i

S

a

,

T

z

,

H

d
o

i

M

N

a
e

R
w

r

W

a
e
s
a

t

e

r

S

p
p
u

l

d
n
y

&

S

s
a
e

n
v
o
n
o
p
n

t
i

a

i
t

(

R
A

W

S
S

)

S

r
t

t

e

,

n
d
n
o
o
d
v
o
p
n
p
b
p

D

e

m

a

R

s

i

e

p
p

r

o

c
a

h

(

A
R
D

,
f
)
t
-
r
i

a
e

r

e

.

L

g
y
n
d
o

r
r

m
m

a

i
t
l

a
a
a
e
c

l

R

W

S
S

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

r

e
e
c
a
a
e

o

r
i

a
s
e
s
a

m

n

i
t
r
i
t
t

n
o
n
u
o
g
n

.
i
l

W

t
i
f
f

U

e
s

A

g
o
n

i
i

a
s

5
n

y
o
p
n
p
u
v
o
g

e
s

r

r
l

s
c
e
s
a

t

e

n

l
t

y

m

r

w

a

t

e

r

h

e

m

s
e

B
D
A
A
O
D
C
H
A
N
D
G
U
O
U

o
n
o

r

A

c

i
t
,

v

i
I
t
t
i

s
e
e

l
:
r

E

U

,

e

r

m

a

y
n

C
N
N
U

e

h

a

d
n

s

,
,

K
U

,

P
F

,

F
E

,

w
U
K

S

W

,
,
,

r

a

b

F

b
h
d
n
u

,

d
d
n
n
u

s
a

,
t
,
i

I

E
P
S
F

I

a
s

r
i
,

N
A

e
a
c
e

t
r

a
a
a
e

l
I
r
i
,

P
S
F

d
u

)

,

W

,

F

a

n

L

O

(

v

)

C

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

&

Y

u
o

t

h

C

n
k
d
o
n
v
o
d
p
h
o

r
l
i

r

e

&

Y

u
g
o

t
r

h

S

r
t

a
e

t

e

y
g

r
t
f

i

e

i

t

e

a

i
t

v

a

m

e
c

w

r

O

n
o
h
v
u
u
o
y

t
t

m

s
e
e

f
i

o
n

r
l

c

h
d
u
u
o

l
i

d
d
o

r
i

e

n
n

&

a
a

r
t

c

e
c

r

e

l

e

D
H

t

m

s
e

C

h
v

t
l
l
i
i
r
r

u
h
d
o
y
u
o

r

e
s

n

&

Y

h
o
u
d
o
p
o
y
o
o
k
h
n
d
p

j
t
r

S

r
t
t

a
a
e
s

t
i
l
l

e

y
p
g
p
n
o
n

i
l

a
s
e
e
e

i

m

p
p
n

t
r
l

e

m

a
e

8
0
0
n
y
2
g
g
y
o
b

t

s
e

d

t

h
g
u
o
d
n
h
n

r

a
a

B
C

a

c
e
e

r

e

v
n
p

r
t
t

r

m
&

a
a

E

h

l
i

D

v

m

r
t

S

a

e

P

l

a

d
n

Y

E

m

l

m

e

n

t

P

r

a

e

d

.

(

v

)
i

G

e

d
n

e

r

I

m
m

p

r

v
o
u
o

s
e
e
e

d
d

h
d
v
n
o
o
b
n
g

e

e
e
e

r
r

p

a

t
i
r

y

s
a

s
a
c
e

r

i

t

D
H

u
o

t

m

a

I

m

p
o

r
j

v
o

e
s

g
n
d

e
e

v
d
n

a
e
e

r

p
u
o
n

r
t

c

g
o
o

m

s
e
a

r
f

o

m

v

a

i
r

u
o

s

B

a

k
n

p

r

c
e

t

i

r

l

t

r

m

s

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

6

-

 C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

3
a
o

l

I
s

s
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

t

c

l

e

s

A
C

S
S
d
n
S

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

I

i

c

a

t

o

s

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P
P

r

t

s

P

I

L
L

R
A

:

M

P

R

O

V

I

N

G

F

I

S

A
C

L

U

T

A

I

Y
A
N
A
A
N

B

I

L

I

T

T
E

H

N
R

O

U

H
G

I

M

P

R

O

V

E

D

P

U

L
B

I

C

E

X

E

D
N

I

T

R
U

E

M

G

M

E

T

)
i
(

i
i
l
I

m

p

i
t
r

g
o
n
n
d
v
o
n
v
o
u
o
y

i

R

e

v

e
e

u
u
o
n
h
v
u
v
n

e
e

T

r

a
e

n

s

p

a

r

e

n
o
d
u
q
u
n
n
b
v
u

e
a
e
c
c

y

O

g
g
n
v
n
o
o
d
d
g
g
v
n
p
d
o
o
o
o
n
h
n
o

i
i
r

A
A

c
c
e

i
i
t
t
r
t
i
i
t
t

v
v
v
n
n
b
o
n
o
u
u

i
i
t
r
t
i
i

c
e
e
s
a
s
e
e

I

u
y
n
b

c
s

r
t
r

c
e
c
a
e
s
a
e
a
e
a
c
s

i

d
g
n
b
u
d
n
d

i
t
f
i
l
i

s
a
a
c
s

l

s

i

n
o
y
n

m

s
a
e

u

r

a
e

y
d

-

o

l
i

p

i
r

m

r

i
f

l

i
f

t
i

P

b
u
o
o
d

a
c
s
a
e

f
t
i
r
r

o
k
h
g

l
i

r

a

t
r

a

s
e
e

a

e

y
n
b

w

t
i
i

t

f

m

l
t

t

c

l
i

s

c

i

P

i
l

i
t

o

f
i

h
g
d
n
n
n
o
n

l
i
t
i
l

e
a
s

s
a

r

e

e

a
e
a

t
r
i

w

t
i

E

I

T

I

r

m

e

T
E

a

k
x
h

a
s
s
e
e
c
e
e
c
a
a
e
e

n

r

y
u
d
n

s
s

i
r
I
t
t

s
s
e
e

p

f

o

r
r

Y

a
a
e
s
c

m

e
e

n
n
n
o

t

n
o
n
u
q
o
y

j
I

i
t
t
i
t
r
i
i
i

n
v
h

a
s
e
e
e

r
r
t

i
t
t
f

v

I

T

a

n
b
u
p

p

r
i
t

e
c

a
e

d
n

t

e

r

m

e
e

t

E

T

I

i
l

r

m

t

L

e

:

i
r
r
t
r
I
l
i
t
j

g

a

i
t

n
o

I

m

e

m

P

o

j

A

L
P

P

a
e
e
s
a

I

t
,
i
i
i
,
t
i
r

R

a

,
l

W

S
S

p
p
v
u

l

y

a

S

n
n

a
s
a
z
e

C

i
r
l

d
o
n
o
p
u
o
v
o
o

e

r

i

e
c

M

P

s
c
e
c
e

,
t

)
i
i
(

(

a

)

t
i
I
f

m

p

r

g
n
u
v
d
o

i
i
r
t
i
r
t
r
r
t
r
t

T
E

p
x

e
e

d
n

t
i

u

r

e

M

a

g
n
d
h
u
v
b
y
d
n
d
n
u
n
n
v
h
u
d
g
v
d
o
n
o
n
d
n
p
p
x

a

e
e

m

e

u
b
o
n
u
p
d
u

t

P
P
P

t
r

C

D

e

c
e
z

m

p
n
k

t

L
E

e
c
a

g
h
d
o
n
u
u
p
u
d
b
o
d
d
o
g
p
v
n
n
n
o
k
h
p
p
k
g
p
p
p
x
n
x
p
u
y

a

M

e
e
e

m
m

-

r
r

m

r

F

a
s

e

R
w

o

k

i
l

i

t

g
k
d
o
o
o
h
u
g
b
n
u
u
o
y
o
o
y

P

P
S

H

i

r

f

f

d
n
u

s

a
s

l
r

e
e
e
e
e

m

a
e
a
c

s
s
e
e
e

t

E

i
t
t
i

r
t
t

c
a
c

m

o
n

t

s

s

t

m

a

l
l

d

I

m

r

i
t
l

c
c

e

s
e
e
e
s

t
i

r
r
-
t
t
i

e
e
e

o

m

s
e

:

-

M

i

m

F
T

r
r

m
m

E

p
p
p
p
n
n
x
o
o
y
b

a

e

w
R

o

r

k

c

t
r
r
i

e

w

t
i

P

P
S

-

i

m
m

e
e
e

s
a
a
e
s
s
s
e
e
s
a
e
a
c

t

a
c

e
a

s
c

i

d
u
n

r
t

s

r

(
i

m

r

e

d

F
E
P

A

i

t

o

r

)

i
I
I
l

m

o
u
p
u
g
p
p
b
d
b
d
o
n
u
u
p
p

r

d
u
o
d
d
n
p
n
p
b
v
o
o
p
u
o
h
d
d
x
n
g
n
h
o
v
v
o
o

e

m

e

d

i

u

m

t
-

e

r

m

e

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

e

p

l

a

n
n

i

g
n

i

n

e

w

t
i

P

R

P
S

m

i
r
l

s
e
e
e
a
e
e
c
c
c
c
a

e
s
e

t
i
i
i
i
r
r
r
i
)
r

(
t
r
i

e
c
e
s
s
e
e
s

v

a

l

u

a

i
t

n
o

o

f

u
o

t

c

o

m

s
e

o

f

R

e

p
o

a
a

d
n

c
c

n
o
u

i
l
t
r

b
n
u
g
n
y

e

i
l
i
l
t

a
c

b

i
r
t
i
t
i
l
l
i

c
s
e
c
e

y
o

f
t
i

i
l
r

t
i
t

e

i
t
r

l

a

P

E

C
R

r

e

s
e
e
z
e

o
n

m

e

n

t

c

n
o

i
r
t

u
b

i
t

n
o

f

o

r

s

p

a

t

e

i
r
r
i

i
t

t

r

R

W

S
S

c
e
s
a
e
s
c
e
c

e

m
&

a

r

e

r

c
e

v
o

e

i
r

u
g
n

e
s

r

c

h

a

r

g

s
e

f

o

r

e
e
s
e
a

u
u
q
u
d
d
d
d
b
u

t

O

M

r
r

r

a
c
c
e
e
e

m

T
P

i
l
i

W
M

r
i

j

t

I
I
I

,

a

i

a

l

D

e

l

n
o
p
o

m

e

o
n

t
r

&

F

l
t

P

r

t

i
t

P

j

c
e

  N

n
o

r
-
t

S
L

c
e
e

d
n

i
t

g
n
o

A
A

c

i
t

v

i
t
i

s
e

:

W

a

e

r

T

)
i
i
(

(
l

b
u
o
b

)

I

m

v
o
p
d

r
i

i

g
n

E

d
n
h
p
g
x
h

e

t
i
t

u

r

e

M

a
e

n
u
h
d

e
s
c
e
a
e
a
c

d
g

m

n
b
u
o
k

:
i
t

R

s
e
e

n
u
d

e
c

n
d

f

u

e

l

s

i

i

F

u
0
1

e

s

s

i

s
e

a

r

e

i

(

a

%

f

D
G

P

)

R
w

c
s
e

o
n
d
o

i

i
i

i
l

e

t
i
r
f

m
m

r
r
l

-
i

m

c

a

e
e

w

o

o
h
n
y
n
g
u
o
v
n
o
n
o
b
n
h
n
d
d
n

P

R

P
S

R

n
d
n
n
n
d
o

i

e
c

i
t
i

v

s
e
e
s
e

t

d
v
o
b
o
u

e

-
r
i

e
s
e

x

r
f
t
(

c
a

i
r
r
i
t

w

e
a
a

t

r
i
t

y
n
b
o

f
)

u

t
r

h

e

r

r

i
t

s

i

l

s

s

i

o

r

g

N

e
e
e

A
w

c

i
t
:

d
n
v

:
t
,
i
t
t
i
i
t
i
I
r

s
e
s
e

L

d
o
n

i
r

g
n

u

i
t

n
o

a

I
-
l

R

f

m

C

P

R

S

C

)
i
i
i
(

(

a

)

P

n
b
u
n
n
v
v
o
o
v
g
p
u

i
l

e
a
c
s
e
s
s
e
e
e
a
e
a
s
a
e
a
c
s
a
e
s
e
s
e
e
e

S

c
e

t

o

r

R

e

f

o

r

m

–

C

d
d
u
n
p
u
y
v
d
y
v
n
o
h
g
u
n
o
o
o
v
u
p
o
p
p
v
u
h

r
t

e
a
s
a
a
e
e
c

G

e

r
t
i
l
r
i
i
r
t
f

m
m

e

n

t

L

o

w

r

m

g
v
p
n
d
g
d
n
n
n
u
n

t

e
c

f
r
f
t
r
f
f

c
e

i
i
,
i
t
t
i
t

e

r
r
f

o
n
v

s
a

i

v

e

o
d
n
o
n
n
o
n
y
n
u
u
p

r

i
t
l

m

i

e
s
s
e
e
e
s
a
s
s
c
c
s
e
c
e
e
s
e
e
c
e
s
e

c
a
e

m

e

m

e

t

s

m

l

i
r

g
d
n
v
n
o
v
u
g
d
g
b
n
n

r

p
u

d
d
v

l
i

r
t

i

,

f
f
f

m

s
a

d
n

i

i
t

i

i
r

i

r

n
n

m

s
e
e

n

t
.

m

i

i
r
t

a

a

c

i

I

m
m

r

a

t
i
t

a

n

a

g

e

a

a

c

a

l

r

s
e
e
e
s

r
l

t

h

e
e
e
c

d

e

m
m

f

a

m

d

i

u

m

-

r
r
t
t

m

s
e

u
o

r

a
e

r
l
r
t
t

e
e

.

N

e
s
e
c

i
t

h
g
o
y
u
b
v
o
n
n
o
h
n

f

G

v
o

.
t

e

m
m

m

i
r
r
t

d
5

%

i
l
.

I
i

e
e
e

i
r
i
t

e
s
s
e
e
c

e

v

e

r

y

n

s
e
a
s
e

m

i
t

s

m

r

r

v

i

e
c

R
H

d
d
k
n

c
e
s
a
a
e
z
s
s
e
s
a
s
a
e
a
c
e
e
e
a
c
e
e
e

t
t

a

u
v
x
o
g
n
n
p
n
o
n
h
o
o
p
u
g
b
u
n
g
n
o
o

e
e
s
a
c
a

r
f
i
t
l
l
t
l
r
r
t
i
r

n
o

c

u
n
d
d
g
v
p
h
n
y
o
u
g
d
d
u

i

b

f
i
r
t
i
i
i
r
t
f
t
i

g
o
n
n
y
g
n
v
n
o
o
n

m

a
e

i
r
l
t
i

c

v

e

i
f
i
r

a
c

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

i
l

y

s
e

e

r

s
a
c
a
a
c
a
a
e
e
e
s
e
c
s
a
e

R
H

r
i
t

r

e
e
s
e
c
s
s
a
e
e
a
e
c
c
e
c
s
e
c
e
e
e
s
s
a
s

a

l
i
i

f

n
u

c

i
t

n
o

s

a

d
n

p
o

m

l

m

u
g
b

o
u

c
e

r
r
i
t
i
l
i
l

t

.

N

e
c

w
w

e

r
t

e

m

y
u
n
b
o
d
b
n
n
d
n
p
d
o
o
g
n
o
n
d
p
n
p
n
n
n
n
o

r
r

s
s
a
e
a

t
i
l
i
i

&

i

n

r

i
i

w

w

i

l

f
f
i
l
l
i
i
t

O

r
r

g
o

n

r
i
i
t

r
t
r
f

t

m

e

s
s
e

i

n

s
s
e

p

m

g
p
n
u
n
n
o

v

t

m

t
.
i
i
t
i

s

i
i
r
t
t

N

w
w
w

h
n

t

r
t

i

i

c
s
a
s
s
e
c

u

n
o

t

o

h

l

p

t
i

a
a

m

m

r

N

L

a

w

-
i
t

r
r

i
t

a

F

i

n

n

i

a

l

N

d
u
n
d
o
n
n
h
n
p
o
x

-

L

e

i
r

g
n

:

P

b
u
v

,
,
,
i
l

c

E
T
T

e
c
e

l
t
i

s
e
e
s
s
e
e

R
A

i
t
t

e
c
e
a

w

T
F
P
E

I

I

i
r

a
c
c

i

n

M
W

A

,

P

u

r

m

n

T

A

B

I

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

7

-

C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

s
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

t

c

l

e

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

I
d

t
i
r
i

c

a

t
s
e

o

y
n
s
b
v
d
u
p
u
n
o
g
n
p
y
h
g
g
v
n
n
o

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

s

e

i
l
r
t

e

r

e

s
c
s

S

a
e
a
e

e

i
l
i

t
i
t

u

i
t
t

n
o
o

m

c
e
s

r

r

f

r

m

r

s
s
e
c

D

l
-
r
i
r
t
i

c
c
s

u
p
n
o
g
u
o
d
u
p
n
h
o
h
u
o
o
p
u
u
n
n
p
d
b
u
u
u
p

s

r
r
i
f
r
t
l

e

B

l
l
i

a
e
c
e

p
n
d
o
p
n
o
o
n
p
o
u
d

r
f
t
i
t

d
n
d
p
g
h
n
d
n
n
b
o
o
n
p
v
n
d
v
o
u
n
o
y
g

e
s
c
e

d

r
;
r
i
t
t

i
i
l
t
i

e
e
e
s

a
e

n

i
t
t
i
i
t
l
t
r
i

o
n
o
n
o
b
n

a
a

r
r
i
l
t

n
o

a

l

a

o
n

i
t

a

;

N
H
w

C

R

r
f
i
t

;
t

o
h

e

t

s
e
e
s
e
e

o
p

t
r

s
e
s
a
a
c

c
s
e
a
s

r
i
r

a

c
e
e

s

s
e
c
e

l

w

M

/

s
e

r

e

m

n

t

e
s

v

a

d
n

f

f
i
i
l
l
l
l
l
r
t

F

m

l

a
e
e
c

m

e

o
o
u
n
n
v
p
p
o
u
o
y
g
n
n
k
n
o
o
n
3
o
n

t
i

a

i
t

f
l
l
l
i
i
i

b

i
r

k
n
o
o
v

m

e
e
e
s
a
c

i
r
f
r
r
t
t

c

s

o
y
d
n
u

s

r
t

e

m

W

c
s
e
e
e
e
e

i
t

c
s

i
r
f

e
s
s

i
r
i
i
i
r
t
t
i

f

t
r
I

m
m

t
i
t
-

f

w

s

m

l
i

e

2
n
n

t

m

y
d
n

r

e
s
e
c

t
-

g
n
o

i

n

e
e
s

i
r

g
n

s

i

e

m

s

s
e

u

m

)
i
i
i
(

(

b
n
k

)
l
f
i

P

b
u

i
l

c
c

S

c
c
e
a
c
s
s

t
l
i

o
h
d
y
n
o

r

R

e

f

o

r

m

–

L

o
v
v
n
o
d
y
n
v
n
o
n
7
7
o
p
p
0
0
d
p
0
d
0
p
2
2

a
c

l

G

n
o
o
v
o
d

a
c
e

r

n

m

e

n

t

W

a
e

o

a
a
c
c
s

i
i
i
l
t
t

n
d
o
n
p
u
n
u
o
n
n
o
o
n

a
e
c
a

a

o
b
g
u
n
u
0
0
u
h
o
0
g
d
o
o
u
2
n
h

m

r
r
)
i
r
t
l
l
t
i
l
r
l
i
f
l

r
t

t
r
i

t

f

n
d
u

t

e
a

L

a
c

A

m

i

r
t

a

i
t

L

w

(

P

a

n
n
p
p
o
n
u
n

l

a
s

i

d
n
g
n

r

s
e

t
t
i

r

a

w

l

a

r
f
i

e
s
a

s
c
c

f

i

r

e

e
s

r

v

i

s
e
c

.

I

m
m

i
t
i
r
i
r

a
s
a
e
s

L

l

A

r
t

i
t

n
u
p

r
l

e
s
a

g
y
n
b
o
o
n
d
y
n

i

s
a
a
c
a
a
e
a
c

m

a
s
a
e

r

i
t

l
f
i

b
p
p

l

f

f
r

a
a

a
e
a

i
t
i
l
i
r

a

m

i

i

r
t

i
t

e

m

s
e
s

y
b

C

6
0
o
v
0
o
2
o
g
n
n
u
u
o
b
u
o
d
o
y
p
p
d
o
u
o
o
d
u

m

l

a
e
a
e

r
i
t

k
o
p
u
n
o

t
f
i

d
n
d
v
n
n
d
n
h
o
o
p
u

a

t

s
e
e
a
a
a
c
a

d

c

t
i

y
p
b
g
n
n
g
o
d
o
n
y
b
p
g
y
n
n
n
y
n
d
n

m

s
a
a

t

s
e

l
i
r

n
p

a

n

a
e
a
z
s
a
e
c
a
s
e

d
n

m

i
i
t
i
i
r
t
l
r

a
c

a
a
a

l
i
l
l
t

i

t

m

e

t

l

T

i

,

H
A
C
D

e

,

M

a

A

e

D

m
m

b

t
r
r
t

6
0
y
0
g
2

f
f

N

l
l

T

r

a

i

t
i
i
i

P

i
l
t
r
i

r

S

e

&

a
a
e
c
a
s
e
c
c
c
c
e
e
z
c
a
s
e
c
a
a
e
s

l

m

r

L

A

d
p

m

i

s

r
t

a

m

e

r

;

a
c

c
a

u
b

i

l

a

n

s

f

o

r

0
5

l

o

l
l
i
t

c

l
i

e
e
s
e
s
s
a

.

T

i
r

l
(

r
t

n

m

a
s
e
a

g
n
n
n

t

c
a
e
a
e
c
e
a

n
p
d
o
d
o
n
o
n
y
p
u
o
b
n
y
p
g
g
n

t
i
t

i
t
t
i
t
t
r
l
i

e
a
a
e
e

r
l
r
f
i
l

v

r
i
t

n
b
o

s
a
a
c
s
e

i
,
l

s
c

v

A

M

m

U

y
6
o
b
0
0
d
2
h

i
)
l

d

w

m

6
n
0
u
0
g
o
2
n

m

e
c

t

r
l
i
t

i
t

e

a
a

D

5
1

L

o

l

C

l
i
.

B

u

d

s

u

n

i

e

D

e
c
e

m

b

r

O
N
A

t

n
h
h
n
h

a
e
c
e
e
c
e
e
a

l
r
r

D

o
d
n
n
o

r

s

:

e

i
t
l
l
r

s

,

C
K
H
U
N
U
G

,
l
i
t
t
t
i
t
I
i
,
,

s
e

,

a

b
y
n

a
a

D
N
U

P

F

a
e

,
l
r

s
e

r

m

a

y

,

N

t

a

d
n

,

K
U

D
N
U

P

,

U

S

i
(

k
g
u
d
y
o
n
o
u
n
o
p
v
y
o
p
o
u
n
q
g
h
n
n
d
o
n
v
o
n
p

)

t
I

m

p
y
h

r

i

P

d
n
b
u

t
i
l

c

P

r

o

c

u

r

e

m
m

e

v
o
u
u
g
n
p
o

r
t

L

e

r

a
e
s
c
e
e
e
c
c
e
c
a

r

m
m

e

r

c
s
s
a
e
a
s
c
a
s
a
e
e
s
c
c
e
e
a
e
s
a
c

,

n

t
,
t

e

l

a

y

s

,

c

i
l
f

t

f

i

f
t

r

i

p
u
p
p
o
p
o
o

m

l
t
r
r
r

a

i

n

t

m

l
i

m

t

r
/

o
p

t

i
t

r
f

a
e
a

i
t
t
i

n
o
y

d
n

w

c
a

I

e
e
e

d

p
b
u
y
n
p
b

i
r
l

s
e
s
s
e
c
c

p

r

a
s
c
a
e
e
e
s
e
a

l
r
l
r

m

e

t

o

s
a

m

h
g
d
n
n
b
n
o
d
u
o
d
y
u
n
u
o
u
n
o

-

l
r
l
t
t
l

s
e
e
c

t

a

i
l

s

e

d

a

d
n

w

f

i
t
r

i

r

c

t

a
s

u

m

H
A
R

T
L

B

r
-

C
N
U

i
I
t

T

i
t

n
o
p
y
v
o

e

a
a

u
p
b
n
o
u
b
o
d
p
n
p

i
i
r
l
r
t
t
i

a
c
e
e
a
c

p
n
d
o
d

r

s

i

s

-

i

c
s
e

l
t

o
d
o

c
s
e
s

u

i
r
i
r

e
e
s

y
n
b
o
o

f

r
i
f

c
a

m

n
d

s

a

d
n

l

i

c
s

l

u

N
B

a

i
t

g
n
n
o
d
n
n
d
o
g

a

l

P

r

u
u
o
o

c
c

r

e
e

m
m

e
s

p
p
n

t

M

a

d
u
n
v
o

a
e

f
l

a

u
d
n
o

S

t

a
e
s

d
y
n
b

a
a

i
l
r
l

d
b
u
p
d

e
z

i

i
t
i
i
i
l
i
l

D

n

t

a

r

r

i
l

c

a

e

c

s
e

M

o
n

i
r

d
n
d
n
d
g
n
d
n
n
n
n
u
o

a
e
a
a
e
c
s
e

r
t
r
t

a
a
c
s
a
a
a
a
s

k
p

r
i

o
o
d
y
y
d
n
p
n
n
o
o
n
g
d
p
n
o
o
u

e
s
s
z
a
e
e
e
a
a
a
c
e
c
s
s

s

t

e

m

t

d
o
n

e
e
s
e
e
e

p
y
n
g
u
o
n
h
n
u
u
g

a

e
c

i
t

m

e

s
e
s
e
e

n

e
e
e
s

f
t
t

r
r
t

i
r
r
l
i
f
t
I
l

t
r

d
h
o
n

s
s
e
e
c

.

P

7
0
y
u
u
h
v
o
b
g
o
o
p
o
u
o
n
p
p
p

c

T
T

r

L

w

m

c
a

r
r
t

a
e

H

i
l
i
r
r

r
i
t
;

B

d
n
n
n
n
o
n
k
n
d
o
o
n

r
i

t

i
r
t
l
l
r

e

t

e
s
c

f
i
r
i
r
t
i
r

;
i

a
c
c
c
c
s
s
a

i
t
f
r
l

r

C
N
U

T

A
R

L

t
i
i
t
t

b
o
u
p
u

c

d
o

i
i
f
f

a
c
c
s

l
l
i

o

a
s
s

o
d
n
u

r

e

f

c

m

n
n
o
g
n

,
t
t
f

i
f

a

t
t
i
i

o

r

e

r

e

s
c

i
l
l
l
f
i

p
o

i

l
.
i
t

P

r

c

e

m

e

c
a

y

u
b

d

i

g
n

c

o

m
m

e

n

c

i

g
n

i

F

Y

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

8

-

C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

s
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O

t

c

l

e

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

I
p

r
i

c

a

e
e
t
e
e
e
e
a

o

y
n
g
n
p
n
s
o
u
b
n
b
u
n
n
p
d
p
u
d
n
g
u
v
n
g
o
o
u
n
n
n
p

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

s

r

o

c
a

m
m

t

i
f
f
i
l
t
i

c

i

a

l

s

(

v

)

I

m

p

r

v
o

i

g
n

P

b
u

i
l

c

F

i

n

a

n

c

i

a

I
l

M

m
m

r

a
c
c
a

i
f
l
;
r

g
n
n
n
n
o
d
u

a

c

i

a

l

a
a
s
s
a
s
e
s
a
c
e
e
z
c
e
e
c
a
a
c
e

m

e

i
t
r
t
r
i

i
i
t

-
i
-

t

e

a

d
n

n

t

r
r
i
r
t

l

g
x
o

t
l

c
s

i
t

a
e
a
c
a
s
a
e

d
n
u

d
u
d
o

t
i

P

i
l
r
i
r
t
t

o

e

m

t
r

u

d
n
n
n
n
o
h
g
n
n
g
u
n
o
o
o

F
E
P

A

f
i

d
n
d
n
n
o
p
o
g
y
n

i

r

s

S

t

e
a

i

A

t
i

a
s
a
a
c

O
A
R

d
u

i
t
i

g
n

P

r

f

(

s
e

)
r

S

C

r

c
e

m
m

e

i
t

.

P
E

b
d
u
x
n

i
r
l

a
e
e
a
c
s
e
a
e
e
c
e
e
e

D

a
e
e
s

d
b
u
n

t

M

a

b
b
g
o
u
n
n
p
n
b
n
u
h

e
a
a

g

m
m

c
e
e
e
e
a
e
e

n

t

B

l
l
i

a

h
d
u
n
v
n
o
b
p
o
p
v
d
v
u
d
h
n
o
x
d

r

e
c
e
s
a
e

t

d
n
n
d
n
p
h

l

r
t
f
i
t
i

l

w

e

t

r

A
C
O
C

’

s

i

s
e
e
e
c
s

m

t
i
i
i
l
l

h
h

i
t

e
e

r

.

M

t
i

m

a

a
c
s

t

a

A
C
O
C

r

e

o
p

t
r

s

r
I

l

o
n
p
g

t

m

p
u

i
l
l
l

m
m
m
m
m

e
e
e

t

P

r
r
i
t
i
t
i
f
l
t
I

c
a

F

o
n
n
o
o

n

c
e
c
c

M

a

g
n
d
o
n
g
n
n
n
u
d
o
y
n
v
o
n
p
o

a

g
g
n

e

m

e
a

n
d
n

t

s

)
r
t
i
r
I
t
r
f
f

c
e
a
a

t

y
g
n

F

l

e

f
i
t

A

i
t

S
F

n

i

a

l

M

a

u
n
p
n
o
d

e
e
e
s
s
s
a
e

n

t

m

a
c
e

n
o
o
n
g
n

S

s

t

e
a

m

(

A

F

M

I

m

l

n
n
o
n

,
t

O
R

S

C

m
m
m

e

l
i
t

a
s
a
e

l
,
r

a

e
a

i

s
c
s

i
t

t
i
i

d
n
u
h
n

c

I
l

i
t
i

r

i

m

e

w

o

r

k

c

i

t

w

e

r

a

a

l

S

t

a

d

s

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

9

-

 C
D

v
o

n
u

t

r

y
o

e

e

l

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
o

l

s

s
s
s
I

u
b

e

s

a
a

d
n

O
G
O

t

c

l

e

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c
r

o

m

e

s

/

I

i

c

a

t

o

s

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a
a

n
k
n

P

r
r
e

g
o

r

a

m

a

d
n

P

r

t

s

C

O

N
U

T

A
V
N
A
D
Y
R

E

E
L
E

P

M
M

T
T
N
W
N
E
E

O
G
O

A
A

E
M
T
L

4

:

I

R
C
R
N
R

E
E

C
N
R
U
A

S

I

G

A
D
U
C
U
D
C
R
R
U
D
N
A
R

E

S

O

E

S

S

T
E

I

U
A
N

T
T
L
B
L

I

I
I

N
Y

T

H

R
R

O

R
U
U

H
G

I

M

P

R

O

V

E

D

M

F

W

S
m

O

E

S

E

P

O

P

A

O

P

E

O
S
S

E

I
r
t
r
)
i
(

m

v
o
d
u
d
p
q
n
o
u
u
h
o
o
x
h
n
o

r

e
e
e
a
a
e

d

e
z
e
e
a
a
e
e
c
a
s
a
e
e
c
e
a

t
i

e

r

R

s
e

u
o

r

e
c

e
a
c
s
a
c
a
e
e
c
s
a
s
a
c
a
s
c
a

n

e
e
s
c
a
a
e

g

e

u
n
n
y
n
d
o
n
d
n
g
n
o
o
o
o
u
n
h
u
o
p
n
g
h

t

g
g
n
n
o
d
g
n
n

I
i
r
i

A

a
c
a

i
t

p
n
o
o
d
o
n
n
o
v
v
u
n
g
o
v
n

i
t
’
i

s
a
s
e
e
a

:

I

n
u

c
s

r
t

a
s
a
e
a

i

g
n
b

t
r
i
l
i

s
e

u
o

r

e
c

s

i

n

y

G

w

r
r
r
i
r
t
t
t
i
f
t
i
i
i

b

h
g
g
p
g
h
o
n
v
o
h
n
o
p
n
g
v
g
d
n
n
n
n

e

c
a
a

t

e

t

i
r

e

r

t
I

a
s

n
u

i
f
f

c

n

l
l

m

n

t
t

o

f
r

s
s
s
a
s
e
c

m
m

n
u

a
s
a
e

i

t
t
r
i
l

w

a

e

r

f
i
l
l
f
f
r

e
c

m

e

m

n

F

l

d
o
o

i

i

T

w

t
i

h

l

o

e

a

r

y

I

n
o
b

r
i

m
m
m

b

s
e
e
e
e
a
a
s
e
e

r

d
n
p
n
o
u
n
o

f

w

a

t

e

r

n

t
t
i
l
-

a
a
e
s
a
c

m
m

t
i
i
t

b
o
h
g
g
v
g
n
o
n
o
v
n
n
p
v
p
d
h
v
p
b
n
u
g
d
n
d
u
n
n
o
o
v
o
o
p
d
p
d
n
g
g
y
n
n
d
o
o
g
n
o
o
u
p
o
p

i
l
t
i
r
t
t

i
t
r

o

i
r

s
e
s

;
i

b
g
n
d
n
o
n
n
n

i

n

w

r
t
i
r
r
i
i
t
[

r

n

i
i
i

m
m

e
e
a
a

t

t
i
t
i

i
t
i
i
i
r
t
l
t
i
i
t
t
l

m

r
i

s
s
e
a
e
e

e
s
c
a
e

s
e
a
s
e
e

l
t
l
r
-

s

b
o
y

t

t

e

c
c

m

i
r

A
C

S

c

l

c
e
a
c
e

i

g
n

E
L

N

e
s
s
e
a
z
e
c
s
s
a
a
z
e
c
c
a
e
e
a

i
l
r
t
.
f
i
]
t
i
i

R

e

u
d
p
d
o
o
o
n
p

m

n
o

f

l
r
f
,
t

s
a

h

r
l
f

t
r
i
i
t

z
s
e
a
e

u
v
d
n
u

e
c
c
e
a

t

r

e

i
t

T

t
r
r
(
i

r

g
d
n
0
d
1
h
u
d
o
b
n
5
u
n
v
u
y
g
n
n
b
n
o
d
h
b
v
o

a

r
l
l

T

i
t
i
t

M

.

D

.
.
t

&

F

P

P

r

j

E

s
a
s

t

a

n
n
n
b

l
t
i
t
i
l

s
a
s

y
n
u
h
b

a

g
p
h
n
n
o
d
h
d
g
u
n
u
o
u
o
o
u
n
n
h
q
g
o

r

w

c
e
a
a
a
s
c
c
e
a
a
e
c
a
c
e
a
e
e
e
e
s
a

t

r

m

a
a
c
a

p
n
y
o
y
o
o
d
n
d
n
n
g
n
o

g

e

m

e
e
a

n

r
f
r
t
r

a
s
e

m

s
e
c
e

w

o

r

k

d
v
n
u
o
g

i
r
l
i
i
r
r

i
t
i
t
t

t
r

m

t
l
i

l

w

t
i

u
o

r

a
e
e
c
s
c

t

u
o
b
n

l
i

g
n
n
u
d
n

y
o
b

f

m

a
c
s
e
e
e
e
a
s
a
a
a
e
c
a
e
e
e
a

s

r
l
t
i
t
f
i
t
r
r
r
r
t
,
i
t
i
t
t
t

i
r
t

c

m
m

t
i

p
y
u
b
o
n
g

r
i

s

A

e

r

t

r
i
l
i

s
e
c
e

i

S

a

a

’

a

s
a

s

l
I
r
t

g
v
n
o
o
n
n
p
u
h
o

w

w
w
w

h
g
u
o
b
h
o
h
v
n
b
h
o
u

m

e
s

i
f
f

e
a

a

n
o
d
n
n
o

i

c

r

e
e
a
e
s
a
a
e

f

a
a
s

r

m

e

’
r

s

a
c
a
e
e
s
c

t

i
t
t
i
t
r
r
l
r
i
r

g
g
o
o
o
v
v
p
d
o
p

t

t
i
l
i
r

i
t
f
r
t
r

f
l
l

w

t

r

v
n
u
o
o
d

i

g
n

i

s
a
a
a
e
s
s
e
e
s

i
,
t

e
s
e
c
a

m

e
a
a
e
a

t

o
b

m

i
i
t

m

k
p
n
n
n
o
p
o
b

t

e

n
n
o
o
n
o
o
d

e

m

t

e

r

h

t
i
l
i
r

l
,
i

w

r
i
r
t
i

k

d
n

o

h

r

w

t

a

d
n

s

e
s

s
a
s
e
e
a
a
e
e

c
c
a

i
t

I
r

m

r
f

l
i

v

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

w

a

t

e

r

h

a

r

v

s
e

i
t

g
n

i

n

a

i

e

r
t

C

m

l

d

d

r

a

i

n

a

g

e

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

i

n

C

t
i

y

o

f

T

a

i

z

.

L

e
e
s
a
a
e

:

S

a
e

B

i

n

W

t

M

a

m

n

t
t

A

L
P

P
S

d
n
o
u
o
h
o

,

G

r
r

w

a

z
e
a
e

i
r

&

l
i

C

o
n
p
o

e
s
a

a
e
c
e

i
t

,

T

M

i

c

i

i
t
t
l
l

D

e

,
l

m

n

t

&

F
T

l

P

r

i
t

A
R

S
L
S

D

,

A
A
N
 N

,

H

a
e
e

g
n
h
d
n

R

e

f

r

m

o
o
p
p
u
h

r
t
r
t

n
o

-

L

:

H

a
e

t
l

c
e

T

a
e
e

A
w

c
e
c

i
t

y
u
p
d
o
o
n
v
o

i
r
t
i
t

s
e

:

W

t

e

r
i

S

T

A

L

d
n

g
n

:

P

l
r

a

i
t

n
u
o
d

i
t
,
I
I

R
G

l
r
i

s

S

c
e

a

E

a
c

n
o

,

P

S

C

I
-

)
i
i
(

I

m

p
o
k
n
o
o

r
f

v
o

c
s
s
s
e
e
e
e
c
a
a
c
a
e
e
c
c
a
a

d

h
g
n
o
o
o
h

r
t

o

l

v
o

e

r

a

i
i
l
r
t
i
t

w

L

c
a
c

i
l
t
,

r
t

n
p
y

i
t

d
n
v

w

a
e
s

t
f

t

u

e
s
a

t
i
f
l
l
i

w

o

m

m

l

e

r

r

t

.

C
R

s
s
e
e
e
e
e
s
a
e
e
e
c
c
a

i
t

P

r

e

a

l

e

n

e
c

e
e
s
a
a

t

n
n
o
o
g
n

r

%

(

u
h
2
7
b
d
1
3

t

r
r
r
t
t

a

i
t
l

s

e

r
i
r

R
H

P
S

r
i
t

e
s
e
a
c
e
a
c

i
r

)

.

S

e
e
a

l
f
l

g

l
r
i

s
e

-
t

n

r

m

n

s

i

o

%

P

d
o
n
h
u
o
g
p
o
u
o

l

a

i
t

n
2
o
y
d
o

m

l
i

s
e

t

n
o

s
e

d

c
s
e

i
r

b

e

d

i

n

P

l
l
i

a

r

2

,

A
C

S

O

t

c
c
e

m

e
a

.

S
P

r

E

p
o
u
u
d
v

a
e
a
c

i
t

o
n
o
d

S

r
t
i
.

a
c

t
r

e
s
a
e
e

y
g

i

s
s

a

p
y
o
p
d
p
u

t

e

d
o

f
;
f

r

r

a
e

m

e

e

r
l

t

n

l

e

m

a

l

e

t

c
a
e

r

s

f

r

r

a

l

r

s
a
e

L

f
i

e

s

k

l
l
i

s

a

d
n

o

t

h

e

r

a

p
p

i
l

e

d

s

b
u

j

c
e

t

s

i

n

c

l

d
u

e

d

i

n

c
e
s

d
n
o

a

r

y

c

u

i
r
r

c

u

l

u

m

.

N

u
d
g
n
y
d
n
y
d
g
n
n
o
o

-

L

a
e

i

:

G

l
i
r
t
i

s

S
S

a
c
e

r

E

a
c

n
o

r
t

t

e

,

W

B

I

 O
G

r
t

h

e

r

D

o
n
o
y
n

r

s
e

:
t

e

m

a

,

N

h

e

l
r

a

d
n

s

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 1 - 

CAS COMPLETION REPORT 

ANNEX 3 

Country:  YEMEN                              
Date of CAS:  August, 2002 
Period covered by CAS Completion Report:   FY03-05 
CAS Completion Report Completed by:  Afef Haddad and Gaiv Tata, with contributions from 
                                                                  from Core CAS Team members 
______________________________________________________________________________ 

I.    INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This document reviews the experience implementing the International Development 
Association’s (IDA) Country Assistance Strategy for the period FY2003-2005 (Report 24372-
YEM) dated August 6, 2002 which was endorsed by the Board on September 5, 2002.  The 
document assesses the effectiveness of IDA’s strategy in (i) aligning its objectives with Yemen’s 
long-term strategic goals; (ii) setting relevant, measurable and realistic CAS outcomes; and (iii) 
achieving its expected outcomes in an efficient and sustainable way.  Furthermore, this document 
evaluates IDA’s performance in designing its strategy taking past assessments and lessons into 
consideration (such as IEG Evaluations); and presents a set of lessons for subsequent CAS 
design.  In addition to discussions with the country team and government counterparts, this 
assessment is based on reference documents such as the CAS, Project Appraisal Documents, 
Implementation Status and Results Reports, supervision reports (Aide-Memoires, and Back-to-
office Reports), reports related to Economic and Sector Work, Implementation Completion 
Reports, and IEG reports and Project Assessments.     

II.    YEMEN’S LONGER TERM STRATEGIC GOALS 

2. 
The 2002 CAS focused on supporting the main objectives of the Second Five Year Plan 
(SFYP) for the period 2001-2005 and Yemen’s First PRSP for the period 2003-2005.  Yemen’s 
First PRSP defined the country’s key development challenges as: (i) high population growth, 
particularly its geographic distribution away from water resources, the problems of urbanization 
and poor labor market demand, limited opportunities for women, and the rapid rise of child 
labor; (ii) water scarcity, exacerbated by population growth, and poor waste treatment, and the 
related negative impact on agriculture;  (iii) weak human resources, linked with poor health 
conditions, lack of education standards and adequate vocational training, and lack of capabilities 
and opportunities for women; and (iv) weak institutional capacity of the state including 
overstaffing, that led to a heavy wage bill, corruption, and weak judiciary system. 

3. 
The PRSP proposed four strategic pillars of intervention: (i) Achieving economic 
growth through following macro and micro-economic policies suitable for poverty reduction, 
and also through job creation and expansion of the economic opportunities of the poor by 
addressing the structural causes of poverty, focusing on its prevention, and providing sustainable 
means of livelihood; and through conserving, protecting the environment, and improving water 
availability, distribution, and management; (ii) Developing human resources by managing 
population growth through increased awareness of reproductive health and family planning, 
improving primary health care, in rural areas in particular; controlling endemic diseases that 

 
 
 
- 2 - 

represent major reasons for continued poverty; improving literacy rates, especially for women; 
and promoting technical and vocational training; (iii) Improving infrastructure through 
enhancing potable water supply, increasing electricity coverage for rural population, and 
improving rural roads; and (iv) Ensuring social protection through social safety nets and social 
security programs, particularly the pension programs. 

III.    YEMEN’S PROGRESS TOWARDS ACHIEVING ITS DEVELOPMENT GOALS 

4. 
The long term strategic goals for the country remained relevant throughout the CAS.  The 
Government’s First PRSP Progress Report (for 2003 and 2004) – and the associated Bank/IMF 
Joint Staff Assessment - acknowledges that only limited progress was made towards achieving 
the long-term development goals.  However, despite that achievements in the first two years have 
not been positive across all objectives, the government has made a good start in linking financial 
resources to development plans and establishing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to 
review and revise their plans, as needed.  There have been some successes in meeting targets for: 
basic education enrollment (for both boys and girls), road rehabilitation and maintenance, power 
supply and expanded coverage for social protection.  The main goal of reducing the percentage 
of the poor by 13 percent is not likely to have been met.  Missed targets also include: GDP 
growth, mortality indicators for infants, children and mothers, and access to water, roads and 
electricity. As the main reasons for the weak performance, the Progress Report identified: 
dampened investor interest in the region following the second Iraq war; internal security 
concerns; and a slowdown in economic reforms.  While concurring that the very slow pace of 
structural reforms was the main cause of the poor progress under the PRSP, the JSA also 
identified insufficient action in public sector management and governance as impediments to 
growth.   

Table 1:  KEY INDICATORS OF PRSP PROGRESS 

Base in 2000 Target in 2005 Actual 2004 28

Goal 

Reduce poverty 
Increase real GDP 
Control of Population Growth 
Health services 
Education Enrolment 
Increase Water and Sanitation 

Increased Electricity Service 
Expansion of the Roads Network 

Social Welfare & Assistance 
Gender Gap 

Indicator 

Poverty Incidence (total) 
Real GDP growth rate 
Population Growth rate 
Coverage rate 
Basic Education Enrolment 
- urban ( percent of pop with access)
- rural ( percent of pop with access) 
 Percent of pop. with access 
Km of roads built  
Km of roads rehabilitated 
No of beneficiaries 
GDI  

41.6 
5.1  
3.5 
50 
62 
64 
-- 
30 

450160 
0.428 

35.9 
5.4 
3.0 
65 
69.3 
69 
65 
40 
1250 
2586 
600610 

 40.1 
 3.5 
 3.0 
 63 
68.9 
62.4 
34.0 
37 
1436 
7873 
650000 
0.427 

5. 
Changes in major assumptions.   There  were  two  major  assumptions made in the CAS  
which did not materialize to the extent predicted:  reduction in oil’s contribution to GDP and 
fiscal revenues; and the pace of decentralization of service delivery to governorates and local 
governments.  First, oil prices moved up starting in 2004 and the higher prices led to better GDP 

28 Most recent data available per Yemen PRS Progress Report for 2003 and 2004.   

  
  
 
                                                 
 
- 3 - 

and fiscal outcomes than expected.  However, the high oil prices in Yemen also reduced the 
sense of urgency that was perceived domestically regarding the impending growth and fiscal 
crisis and led to greater resistance to reform.  The package of reform measures remained before 
Parliament for a long period of time and when approved in July 2005, right after the end of the 
CAS period, were only partially implemented.  Second, the CAS was designed under the 
assumption that broad consensus had been achieved around the decentralization agenda 
embedded in the 2000 Local Government  Law, which was described as having “set in motion a 
radical shift of power from the central government to local authorities governed by councils 
elected in February 2001”. In fact, though local councils were elected in 2001, the fiscal 
decentralization that was required to underpin the devolution of power to the local councils did 
not progress much at all. Further, there were clearly issues with regard to the Bank 
recommendations on decentralization not being acceptable to the Government, particularly the 
Ministry of Finance. 

6. 
Recent achievements. Since the end of the CAS period, progress has been made in 
macroeconomic reform, public sector reform, and public financial management.  In addition, the 
government adopted in January 2006 a National Agenda for reform consisting of good 
governance measures.  Those achievements have not been factored into this evaluation 
because they occurred after the CAS period.                    

IV.    ASSESSMENT OF PROGRESS AND ACHIEVEMENTS OF COUNTRY 
ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OUTCOMES 

7. 
Consistent with PRSP’s pillars, the 2002 CAS focused on one main objective that covers 
all four pillars: sustainable poverty reduction.  To achieve this objective, the Bank’s strategy 
was structured around four main pillars: (i) improving the delivery of public services through 
stronger economic governance; (ii) strengthening the enabling business environment; (iii) 
building and protecting human resources; and (vi) sustaining and protecting natural resources.   

A.    Assessment Methodology 

8. 
While the CAS was prepared prior to the current emphasis on results based approaches, it 
contained 65 program indicators/benchmarks.  In the context of the glossary currently in use with 
regard to Results-Based CASs, the indicators/benchmarks in the CAS are a mixture of CAS 
outcomes (i.e. country results deemed achievable in the CAS period and which the Bank expects 
to 
influence 
through 
its 
interventions) and milestones 
(progress markers of CAS 
implementation).  Based on the information contained in the CAS, this evaluation has 
attempted on an ex-post basis to demarcate the indicators into CAS outcomes and 
milestones, including cross-sectoral outcomes, and to build a Results Chain based on the 
text of the CAS and the Program Matrix.  It should be noted that the CAS did not include a 
system for Monitoring and Evaluation of each CAS outcome, and several indicators of success 
that were identified in the CAS were imprecise or missing baseline and target values (e.g. one 
indicator was:  water table declines are slowed or reversed), which made it difficult to evaluate 
the achievement of each pillar compared to CAS baselines and targets.  Consequently, where 
indicators are inadequate or missing, the evaluation can only make qualitative judgments on 
progress. 

 
 
- 4 - 

9. 

This evaluation: 

• 

 uses the Results Chain (Appendix 1) established during CCR preparation to discuss the 
achievement of each one of CAS outcomes as part of one of the four proposed pillars;   
• discusses the overall progress made under each pillar and the relevance of the lending 
and non-lending instruments to the pillar; 
• discusses in detail whether, how, and why the assistance program did or did not achieve 
each of the CAS outcomes; and  
• draws lessons of experience under each pillar and provides recommendations for the 
new CAS.        

10. 
As with regards to the instruments that will enable the achievement of CAS outcomes, it 
should be noted that the CAS document mapped some activities to more than one pillar; in this 
case, the activity is discussed under the pillar to which it was considered to contribute the most.  
In deciding on this primary classification, this evaluation utilized Annex A1 of the CAS and 
mapped CAS activities to their primary theme based on MNA regional strategy. 

B.    Assessment Summary 

11. Overall, performance under the 2002 CAS is rated Unsatisfactory.  The following 
table summarizes the ratings for each Strategic pillar and outcome: 

12. 
It is important to note that unsatisfactory performance should not be interpreted as a need 
to dramatically change the priorities of the next CAS but be viewed as the result of an 
appropriately focused strategy which suffered from a number of shortcomings that the new CAS 
should take into consideration and address, to make it more successful.  Those shortcomings are: 
(a) ambitious targets (both in the PRSP and the CAS); (b) Inappropriateness of the 
assistance program given the outcomes sought; (c) delayed implementation of the lending 
program; (d) delivery of key activities in the non-lending program during the last year of 
CAS implementation; and (e) discrepancy between planned objectives and actual 
achievements.  Specifically, 

(a) Ambitious targets.  Many of the targets set were extremely ambitious given the size of the 
CAS program.  It would appear that the CAS took on the targets specified in the Government’s 
PRSP but in the absence of full funding, these targets were difficult to influence and achieve.  In 
addition, targets for reducing poverty and improving service delivery in percentage terms could 
be considered to be ambitious even in the context of a stagnant population but in the context of 
one that grew by over 1.5 million people during the course of the CAS period, the challenge was 
even greater. 

 
 
 
 
- 5 - 

(b)  Inappropriate instruments.  In several cases, the instruments were either inadequate or too 
modest to achieve the outcomes sought.  For example, the Bank’s support to the Government in 
improving macroeconomic stability was only through Economic and Sector work, which is 
insufficient.  Similarly, given the ambitious program to improve the regulatory environment 
which is listed in the CAS, the Bank only provided support through an Investment Climate 
Assessment – which is merely a diagnostic tool for analyzing private sector development 
constraints.   

(c) Slow implementation.  There were considerable delays in implementing ongoing and newly 
approved projects.  There were delays resulting from procurement packages not being ready at 
the time of credit effectiveness which led to slow start-up; delays resulting from the slow pace of 
the procurement process itself due to the need to involve institutions responsible for Government 
procurement into the procurement activities at the project level, and to the weak procurement 
capacity; and delays resulting from a complex design given the local implementation capacity.   

(d) Fragmented and delayed non-lending program.  Some key think pieces that influenced 
Government strategic choices (e.g. the Public Financial Management Reform; the Country Water 
Resources Assistance Strategy; the Urban Land Policy and Administration Note) were delivered 
late in the CAS period and others (the Development Policy Review and the Investment Climate 
Assessment) slipped beyond the end of the CAS period.  Hence, the impact of these activities on 
influencing systemic changes had to be rated low during the CAS period but their availability 
should allow for a greater focus on implementation during the next CAS. 

(e) Discrepancy between planned objectives and actual achievements.  This is partly due to 
over-optimism related to country’s implementation capacity; and partly due to the fact that, in 
many instances, recommendations made by the Bank were not systematically implemented, 
either due to disagreements at the technocratic and policy levels or due to non-approval by the 
legislature.  The discrepancy between planned objectives and actual achievements is also partly 
due to the fact that, despite its selectivity, the strategy was not implemented in an efficient way 
that aligns tasks with CAS objectives given the resources allocated and given the high-risk 
country environment.  The subsequent CAS should be more realistic than the previous CAS 
in its risk assessment.  It should build constituency for changes through an effective 
communication and outreach strategy, and should describe how the implementation should 
be organized given the scarcity of resources.  In addition, it should be built on the country’s 
readiness and commitment to move the assistance program forward.   

13. 
Rapid Implementation versus Institutional Development. Despite 
the slow 
implementation noted earlier, the Bank portfolio made liberal use of Project Management Units 
(PMUs) though some projects did attempt to work with Government institutions directly (e.g. the 
Port Cities Project used Local Development Departments).  There were two major reasons for 
the use of PMUs:  first, adequately addressing fiduciary requirements; and second, the inability 
of the Bank – under its own guidelines - to compensate  civil servants which, coupled with lack 
of progress on civil service reform, (particularly continuing low pay) would have resulted in 
limited motivation for implementation.  The alternative also utilized was the use of two enclave 

 
 
 
 
 
 
- 6 - 

entities – the Social Fund for Development and the Public Works Program.  These projects, 
which are legally established enclaves that bypass the constraints affecting the mainstream 
civil service, demonstrated the potential for efficient service delivery in a low capacity 
environment. However, their experience is not more broadly replicable due to cost 
considerations and further, as these institutions have grown in scale, the challenge of 
coordinating with Government ministries has grown.   

Table 2:  SUMMARY RATINGS 

CAS Strategic 
Pillars/Ratings 

I. Improving the delivery of 
public services through 
stronger economic 
governance: Unsatisfactory 

II. Strengthening the enabling 
business environment: 
Unsatisfactory    

III. Building and Protecting 
Human Resources: 
Moderately Satisfactory     

IV. Sustaining and protecting 
Natural Resources.  
Moderately Unsatisfactory 

CAS Outcomes 

Improved enabling environment for civil servants and 
enhanced fiduciary accountability of government at the 
central and local levels.  
Skilled and more credible Judicial System that leads to 
enforcing service delivery standards.  
Better revenue and expenditure management.  

Better investment climate through macro stability, 
improved business regulatory environment, enhanced 
security, more secure property rights, improved access 
to finance; and through improved physical 
infrastructure (water, power & roads).  
Reducing the role of the state in commercial activities 
including the financial sector. 
Increased access and quality to education at all levels, 
with emphasis on girls and women. 
Improved coverage and quality of health services. 
Cross Sectoral Outcomes: 
Contribution of Infrastructure to Health and Education 
Safety Nets 
Community Development  
Gender 

Improved conditions for water availability in place, 
through strengthened water depletion mitigation 
measures. 
Efficient mitigation measures against depletion of other 
natural resources (petroleum and coastal fisheries) and 
against pollution in place. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 7 - 

Table 3:  SUMMARY OF KEY STRENGTHS AND SHORTCOMINGS 

What Worked? 

Why? 

What did not Work? Why? 

Strategic 
Pillar I. 

- Adequacy of pillar and 
outcomes with PRSP 

- Relevance to government 
priorities 

- Bank’s timely advice on oil 
prices 

- Civil service reform 
- Decentralization. 

- Complexity of design 

-  Changes in TTLs 

- lack of ownership of fiscal 
decentralization   

- Major instruments not 
sufficient to achieve 
outcomes 

- Most proposed lending and 
non-lending not delivered 

Strategic 
Pillar II. 

- Better focus on removing 
private investment constraints 
than previous CAS. 

- Relevance of proposed 
assistance program. 

- Private sector 
participation 

Strategic 
Pillar III. 

- Education access  

- Government commitment 

- Reduction in gender 
disparities 

- Clear and Simple 
Implementation Arrangements 
with Focus on Capacity Building 

- Donor Harmonization and - 
Resource Mobilization 
- Bank Leadership in Supporting 
Analytical and Strategic Work 
- SFD and PWP efficiency (due to 
incentives, autonomy) 

- Institutional capacity 
in health sector 
- Improved health 
facilities not being used  
- Implementation 
delays 

- Complexity of design 
(Health & Child 
Development Projects) 

- Weak Implementation 
capacity (Health) 

Strategic 
Pillar IV. 

- Focus on groundwater 
exhaustion 

- Strategic focus and selectivity 

- Qat issues still not 
adequately addressed 

- Some Planned analytical 
work not conducted 

- Analytical work: Water CAS 
- Institutional framework. 

C.  

CAS Strategic Pillar I:  Improving the delivery of public services through stronger 
economic governance: Unsatisfactory 

14. 
This pillar included three CAS outcomes: Improved enabling environment for civil 
servants (better salary and performance management), and enhanced fiduciary (including 
financial) accountability of government at the central and local levels; Skilled and more credible 
Judicial System that leads to enforcing service delivery standards; and Better revenue and 
expenditure management. 

15. 
Pillar achievements as compared to CAS goals.  Overall, limited or no progress was 
made against the indicators established to measure achievements in these outcomes (details 
for each outcome are discussed in the following sections). The number of civil servants increased 
rather than declined by 30,000 over three years, real pay levels declined rather than raised and 
decompressed; and civil service restructuring did not progress.  Service delivery continued to 
remain centralized and limited programs were undertaken for local authority capacity building.  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
- 8 - 

Some training was undertaken for the judiciary but overall systemic changes were not 
undertaken.  Finally, aggregate fiscal indicators were partially achieved (fiscal deficit was 2.8 
percent in FY04 as compared to a target of 4 percent) but indicators for social sector spending 
did not increase by the substantial levels projected (share of social expenditures was 8.6 percent 
in FY04 as compared to a projected 13.2 percent of GDP).   Given limited progress, CAS 
outcomes under this pillar cannot be considered sustainable and overall achievement made 
under this pillar is unsatisfactory. 

16. 
Bank Assistance.  As indicated in the following table, this pillar was expected to be 
supported by two ongoing projects; three new loans (of which none were delivered) and nine 
non-lending activities (of which only six were delivered).   

Ongoing  
Lending at start 
of CAS 
1.  Civil Service 
Modernization 
2.  Legal and 
Judicial 
Development 

Table 4: BANK ASSISTANCE UNDER PILLAR I 

Actual Lending 

Actual 
ESW/TA 

Planned lending 
not delivered 

Planned ESW/TA not delivered 

1.  Monitoring and Evaluation 
2.  CPAR 
3.  Public Services Delivery 
(IDF) 

1.  Local and 
Community 
Development 
2. Civil Service 
Modern. II 
3. Poverty 
Reduction 
Support Credit 

None 

1.  CFAA 
2.  Public 
Financial 
Management, 
3. Procurement 
Cap. Building 
(IDF) 
4. Budget/ 
Poverty impacts 
of petroleum 
pricing 
5. Budget & 
expenditure 
streamlining 
6. Public 
expenditure 
management 

Outcome I.1:   Improved enabling environment for civil servants and enhanced fiduciary 
 accountability of government at the central and local levels  

17. 
Improving the enabling environment for civil servants through the Civil Service 
Modernization Project was relevant to the strategy and to the government’s concerns.  
Complexity of design led to several implementation delays that hindered the full 
achievement of the expected outcome.  The project was too complex in light of the institutional 
environment with separate demanding components under the Ministry of Civil Service and the 
Ministry of Finance, respectively.  It went into problem status and remained problematic through 
most of the CAS period.  In November 2004, the Bank indicated to the Government that if no 
significant progress was achieved in the next six months, the project would be cancelled.  The 
Government made a credible effort to turn the project around and many delayed activities are 
now being implemented which led to the project being upgraded.  The government initiated 
measures to improve accountability and oversight with an effort to establish a high-level steering 
committee to oversee the link between the Accounting and Financial Management Information 
System (AFMIS) and the broader reform agenda in the Ministry of Finance.  Reengineering of 
major agencies and creation of a biometric identification system, both prerequisites for civil 

 
 
 
 
- 9 - 

service rationalization have made progress.  The civil service fund, to be used for severance 
compensation, has been created.  However, the development impact from this project (which has 
been extended up to December 2007) did not materialize during the CAS period.  As a result of 
the earlier implementation problems, the Second CSMP (envisaged for FY05) was not prepared 
during the CAS period. 

18. 
The objective of enhancing the fiduciary accountability of government at the local 
level was not achieved.  The Bank aimed at providing an operational framework for the 
Government’s ambitious decentralization agenda with the aim of enhancing local revenue 
collection and improving local budgetary planning and expenditure management.  It also aimed 
at incorporating more participatory and responsive approaches to community-level development, 
as measured by improved local authorities’ financial management and accountability.  The 
District and Community Development Project (FY04) that was expected to support this effort 
was dropped.  The project was eventually designed in the form of a Learning and Innovation 
Credit, but never advanced beyond the appraisal stage.  A key aspect of the project design was 
for the Credit to finance a portion of the operating and maintenance costs of 20 pilot districts, 
which was intended to trigger additional resources transfers from Ministry of Finance (MOF).  
However, MOF expressed concerns with this approach viewing it as a precedent on the basis of 
which all other districts in the country might want increased central transfers to cover their 
operating costs.  Despite strong support for the project from the Ministry of Local 
Administration, lack of Government consensus on the appropriate approach eroded support for 
the Project and by November 2004, the Bank decided to drop the project. 

19. 
To support the decentralization agenda, the Bank assisted the city of Taiz in its 
development29.  Through Bank support, the city completed an updated city master plan. It 
has developed and adopted a solid waste management strategy, improved management of 
city assets (having established recently a new Asset Maintenance Unit) and has actively 
engaged city residents through the launching of a public awareness campaign and various 
other initiatives aimed at improving city services and reducing poverty.  A newly-established 
Task Force on urban poverty, including city officials, NGO representatives and the private 
sector, was launched in June 2005 with Bank-support.  Survey work is underway with the aim of 
developing more appropriate and effective approaches to tackling urban poverty focusing, in 
particular, on the role of the local city administration.  Despite the lack of progress at the national 
level, some 15 new Local Council buildings are being constructed and equipped under 
Bank’s support in an attempt to help consolidate local-level administration.     

20. 
Non-Lending Activities made progress late in the CAS period and did not result in 
the expected policy changes during the CAS period.  A Multi-Year Review of Public Sector 
Management under Decentralization was expected to be initiated in FY03.  The objective of this 
review was to lay the groundwork for capacity building in governance and identify some key 
“entry points” and local “champions” to lead the effort.  Eventually, in FY05, a report on Budget 
Reform and Decentralization (FY05) was prepared.  However, the Government did not agree 
with the Decentralization chapter of the report and implementation actions were not undertaken.     

29 Support was through the Local Government Capacity Building Component of Taiz Municipal Development 
Project.    

                                                 
- 10 - 

21. 
Based on a an analytical piece on Public Expenditure Management processes in FY05, 
the Cabinet approved the Public Finance Management (PFM) Reform Strategy on August 
9, 2005, and established a Ministerial committee to oversee implementation of the PFM 
action plan which is supported by a Memorandum of Understanding between the Government 
and donors who would support implementation of the Action Plan.  The adoption of the IMF’s 
General Finance Statistics (GFS) 2001 budget classification system is part of the PFM action 
plan and will be utilized in preparing the 2007 budget during calendar year 2006. While these 
developments represent significant progress, given that the plan was prepared late and 
approved after the end of the CAS period, there was no implementation.   

22. 
Following Bank’s advice under the Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
(CFAA), the government has made some steps in addressing corruption by establishing an 
anti-corruption commission. 
 However, the CFAA (FY05) suggested that increased 
transparency in the activities of this commission is needed, along with a stronger message that 
the government is against corruption and that it put in place measures to punish corruption.  The 
CFAA also suggested revisions to the Financial Law to provide for a modern internal control 
framework in compliance with international standards, and full implementation of modern 
internal audit across Government.   

Outcome I.2: Skilled and more credible Judicial System that leads to enforcing service 
  delivery standards  

23. 
The assistance program for the judicial reform was extremely modest given the 
outcomes sought.   Only modest amounts of training were delivered (approximately 26 courses) 
and the impact of these training activities could not be evaluated due to absence of baseline or 
end of project surveys.  Beyond training, the CAS had no support to improve other indicators of 
improved judiciary performance.  The training was conducted under the ongoing Legal and 
Judicial Development Learning and Innovation Credit (LIC) of US$2.4 million – of which 
eventually only USUS$1.9 million was actually disbursed.    The LIC had been designed to be 
followed up with an Adaptable Program Credit (APC) but the CAS did not contain any follow-
up operations.   

Outcome I.3:  Better revenue and expenditure management  

24. 
Expected outcome was not realistic, but unplanned, proactive advice was timely.  
The achievement of this outcome was expected to be measured through a significant shift in 
public expenditures (by approximately 4 percent of GDP) to the social sector expenditures.   
However, the outcome was supported primarily by public expenditure analysis which is not 
sufficient to achieve a change in allocations by US$400 million (in 2005 GDP terms) over three 
years.  The Poverty Reduction Support Credit of US$70 million also envisaged for FY05 to 
provide a quick disbursing budget support was not prepared given that the triggers for the high 
case scenario (which focused primarily on governance and macro indicators) were not achieved. 

25. 
Following the increase of the fiscal cost of the domestic subsidy for fuel products to 6 
percent of GDP by 2004, and based on Bank’s advice, Yemen increased its oil prices.  The 
Bank’s advice was based on an unplanned study on the Budgetary and Poverty Impact of 
Petroleum Pricing (FY05).  The main recommendations of this work were to slowly raise prices 

 
 
- 11 - 

while simultaneously implementing measures to protect the poor from the impact of the price 
rises.  While Yemen followed the Bank’s recommendation to increase oil prices, it did not 
raise the prices gradually as suggested in the report, nor deal with the safety net issues.  It 
raised the price of diesel in one step from YR 17/litre to YR 45/litre without accompanying pro-
poor measures designed to mitigate the social impact of price increase.   These increases resulted 
in demonstrations, riots, the loss of life and destruction of property, and the government rolled 
back the price increase to YR 35/litre.  Future adjustments to and the long-run elimination of fuel 
products subsidy also remains uncertain as a result. 

D. 

CAS Strategic Pillar II:  Strengthening the enabling business environment 
Unsatisfactory 

26. 
The second major pillar of the CAS was to support Yemen in creating an environment 
conducive to private investment that will create more jobs, and contribute to sustainable poverty 
reduction.  IEG’s 2001 CAE for Yemen was critical of the Bank’s strategy for improving the 
investment climate.  It stated that “a second weakness of the assistance strategy is the relatively 
low priority given to removing constraints to private sector development, a priority for Yemen's 
future”.    

27. 
The CAS addressed this concern by making private investment one of its major 
pillars.   To achieve the expected results, the CAS aimed at supporting the government in key 
reform areas while addressing specific constraints that hinder the promotion of private 
investment.  The CAS, hence, sought to focus on improving security; macro-stability; improved 
regulatory environment; improved land tenure; improved financial system; and improved 
physical infrastructure.    

28. 

Pillar achievements as compared to CAS goals.  In summary:  

• 

• private investment to GDP ratio of 18 percent was not met, neither was the 
commercial long-term lending rising by 50 percent.  The indicator of rising the long-
term lending by 50 percent is not justified as an important measure of achieving this 
CAS outcome;  
Inflation targets (of below 10 percent) were not achieved but the actual inflation 
remained in a reasonable range of the target never exceeding 12 percent by June 
2005;  
• progress was made in achieving infrastructure outcomes (for roads and power) though 
private sector participation goals for the power sector were not met.  Again, the 
expected increase in electricity coverage (40 percent) and the goal of private 
participation (introduced in the Sana’a Emergency Power Project in 1999) were 
highly ambitious. By 2002, international experience clearly showed that private 
participation in the power sector in Yemen was not a feasible option; and  
there was limited progress in the financial sector with the passage of a Banking Law 
amendment and anti-money laundering legislation.   

• 

29. 
Bank Assistance.  Two CAS Outcomes were sought under this pillar: (i) Better 
investment climate through improving business regulatory environment,  macro stability, 
enhanced security and physical infrastructure (water, power & roads); and more secure property 

 
 
1. Port Cities 
Development 

Ongoing  
Lending at start 
of CAS 
1.  Sana’a 
emergency power  
2. Seeds and 
Agricultural 
services 
3.  Southern 
Governorates 
Agricultural 
privatization 

1. Sources of  Growth 
2.  Urban Land policy & 
Administration 
3. Rural Development 
Strategy Implementation 
& Agri. promotion  
4.  ROSC-AA 
5.  Financial Sector 
Dialogue 
6. Restructuring Ministry 
of Agriculture & Irrigation 
7. Power sector reform 

1. District and community 
development 
2.  Power restructuring 
and expansion (high case) 

1. DPR(*) 
2.  Investment climate (*) 
3.  Integrated framework 
for trade 
4. Infrastructure for 
mineral exports 
5. Agricultural and 
Maricultural Export 
strategy  
6. Tourism development 

- 12 - 

rights and improved access to finance; and (ii) Reducing the role of the state in commercial 
activities including the financial sector.   

30. 
In retrospect, the assistance program to achieve CAS outcomes was relevant.  As 
Table 5 indicates, this pillar was expected to be supported by three ongoing projects; three new 
loans (of which only one was delivered) and thirteen non-lending activities (of which only seven 
were delivered). 

Table 5:  BANK ASSISTANCE UNDER PILLAR II 

Actual 
Lending 

Actual 
ESW/TA 

Planned new lending not 
delivered 

Planned New ESW/TA 
not delivered 

(*)  DPR and Investment Climate were undertaken but not completed by the end of the CAS period. 

Outcome II.1:   Better investment climate through macro stability, improved business 
   regulatory environment, enhanced security, more secure property rights,  
   improved access to finance; and through improved physical infrastructure  
(water, power & roads) 

31. 
The outcome was relevant to the country’s long-term strategic goals and to the 
strategic pillar, but major instruments were not sufficient given the outcomes sought.   
First, the Bank’s support to the Government in improving macroeconomic stability was only 
through Economic and Sector work, which was insufficient.  Second, given the ambitious 
program to improve the regulatory environment which is listed in the CAS, the Bank only 
provided support through an Investment Climate Assessment – which is merely a diagnostic tool 
for analyzing private sector development constraints. Third, Bank’s contribution to non-oil 
production and diversification was very modest.    

32. Outcome achievements under the CAS can be described as follows: In the Power 
sector, the Bank contributed to addressing the sector's significant electricity shortages which was 
extremely urgent given power supply bottlenecks, high energy losses, and poor maintenance.  
Following Bank’s support, Public Electricity Corporation’s (PEC) overall energy losses were 
reduced from 40 percent to 33 percent and the quality of service to consumers has 
improved, as confirmed by the beneficiary survey carried out as part of the independent 
Impact Assessment Study conducted as part of the Implementation Completion Report (ICR) of 
the Sana’a Emergency Power project.  Over a third of those surveyed expressed a willingness to 
pay more for better electricity supply with fewer interruptions.  The total incremental generation 
capacity resulting from the project was about 35MW and will rise to about 40MW in mid 2006.  

 
 
 
 
  
- 13 - 

However, progress in sector reforms has been very modest and the objective of introducing 
private sector participation was not fulfilled.  The overall achievements under this assistance 
were marginally satisfactory.  In addition, since the high case scenario did not materialize, the 
new Power Sector Restructuring and Expansion project was not delivered during the CAS 
period. 

33. 
The development of the fisheries sector can be considered as a success story under the 
CAS and came from the Bank not lending until the appropriate policy framework had been 
put in place (Box 1).   

34. 
In micro-finance, the Bank contributed to laying the foundation of an emerging micro 
finance industry, through the SFD.  This is a major achievement in a country where the concept 
and practice of microfinance did not exist prior to SFD’s inception and more impressively where 
the client base (borrowers and savers) of micro finance programs established with SFD2 support 
increased considerably. The SFD provided financial and technical assistance to 10 micro 
finance programs which by the end September 2005 had 23,856 active borrowers and 
26,815 savers, mostly women. About 72,970 loans totaling YR 2,180 million have been 
provided.  Loans averaged YR 27,000 which suggests that microfinance programs have been 
effective in targeting the poorest and neediest groups.  The total outstanding loan portfolio is 
estimated at YR 456.51 million.  Across the Micro Finance Institutions (MFI), portfolio at risk at 
3-4 percent, with only two MFIs at 10 percent and three MFIs have reached perfect repayment 
rates.  Of the 10 microfinance programs, 50 percent have reached operational self-sufficiency 
and there are good indications which suggest that the remaining programs, over time, are likely 
to achieve financial sustainability. 

35. 
In Ports, and through its support to Aden, Hodeidah and Mukallah30, the Bank 
contributed to enhancing their potential as engines of growth.  It prompted national level 
reforms, such as reinitiating the process of concessioning the Aden Container Terminal to 
the private sector and adoption of an open skies policy in 2005.  The open skies policy would 
improve Yemeni city competitiveness by increasing air traffic volume and providing regional 
and international carriers greater access to Yemen, particularly important for Yemen’s air cargo 
shipment needs (fresh seafood) to European, Asian and Gulf destination markets.  It also fostered 
decentralization reforms, including devolution of master planning and private sector investment 
project approval to the city level; assisted in integration of the Aden Free Zone and Container 
Terminal into city investment and service provision planning; conducted a Gas Utilization Study 
which is leading to a privately financed extension of the gas pipeline and power generator in 
Aden; renovated city assets being utilized by functioning Governorate Departments; and assisted 
in promoting public-private partnerships. Over US$85 million in new private capital investments 
in Aden alone over the past year have created an estimated 1,800 new employment opportunities. 

30 Adaptable Program Credit for Port Cities Development Project. 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 14 - 

Box 1:  THOROUGH ANALYTICAL WORK AND POLICY FRAMEWORK AS PREREQUISITES FOR 
LENDING IN THE FISHERIES SECTOR PAY OFF  
The Bank prepared a Fisheries Sector Strategy Note that pointed out that since 1994 the Government of Yemen 
(GOY) had allowed licensing of 113 large foreign industrial vessels.  These along with other vessels were leading to 
the unsustainable exploitation of fish stocks.  The report pointed out that the expansion had several undesirable 
effects: official exports at about USUS$13 million was well below its potential, while the growth of poverty 
alleviation oriented small-scale artisnal fisheries was  being constrained.  The report recommended that the 
reduction of such excessive effort to sustainable levels should have a priority to allow fisheries stocks to recover.  
Initially GOY was reluctant to change the fisheries sector policy which favored licensing of large numbers of 
foreign industrial vessels.  As the policy framework was not supportive of further investments in artisanal fisheries, 
the Bank decided to discontinue lending to fisheries sector until an appropriate policy framework had been put in 
place.  Following internal discussions and a change of Minister in-charge of the Ministry of Fish Wealth, GOY 
decided to discontinue giving out licenses to large foreign industrial fishing vessels in 2002 and by 2003 most old 
licenses were phased out.  This had an immediate and favorable impact on fish stocks.  The fish production from 
small-scale fisheries, fish exports, and sector employment all started growing at double digit rates and by 2004 fish 
exports reached a level of about USUS$210 million.  In view of the more favorable policy framework, the Bank 
restarted fisheries sector lending in Yemen with an IDA credit about USUS$25 million in 2005.     

36. 
In the Agriculture Sector, Bank’s achievements in increasing private sector participation 
were modest, though changes were made to legislation and institutional arrangements through 
the issuance of the seeds law and its by-laws under the Seeds and Agricultural Services 
Project.  The main shortcoming was related to slippage in the program for privatization of the 
major entities; though privatization has been approved, the transactions have not yet been 
completed.  However, The Southern Governorates Agricultural Privatization project is 
expected to meet its development objectives though this is occurring 3 years later than the 
originally planned closing date.  Further, given the problems with the Government providing 
land free of claims, this component of the project was downsized to around 10 percent of the 
original land development area and the balance has been reallocated to spate irrigation and/or 
cancelled.   

37. 
Bank’s achievement of outcomes through analytical work was modest.  First, the Land 
Registration ESW was undertaken in FY05 as planned and was entitled the Urban Land Policy 
and Administration Note.  It made recommendations for: improving the demand for the land 
registration system and for reducing land disputes in the court system; and for improving the 
management of state lands in urban areas.  These recommendations were considered at a 
workshop in September 2005 and a Task Force was assigned the responsibility of implementing 
the action plan.  Since that time a proposal to merge all land related agencies (public land 
administration, land survey and registration, and mapping) into a single agency to enhance 
efficiency in the sector was submitted, and the World Bank provided its input in December 2005 
on the approach going forward.  Second, the Report on the Observance of Standards and 
Codes-Accounting and Auditing (ROSC, FY05) helped bring to the government’s attention 
significant weaknesses in the Auditing and Accounting system.  Among others, the ROSC 
suggested the need to close the gap between the international standards and the actual auditing 
and reporting practices.  The Central Bank of Yemen issued guidelines to banks and auditors on 
corporate financial reporting, but these guidelines were not in line with international 
accounting standards.   

- 15 - 

38. 
Two key non-lending products were delayed. First, 
the preparation of 
the 
Development Policy Review commenced in FY05 but was not completed before the end of the 
CAS period.  Therefore its recommendations were not available for implementation during the 
CAS period.  Second, the firm survey underlying the Investment Climate Assessment was 
undertaken in FY05 but the survey results and the final report were not completed by the end of 
the CAS period.     

Outcome II.2:  Reducing the role of the state in commercial activities including the 
    financial sector  

39. With Privatization Support Project never becoming effective as it was not approved by 
the Parliament, there was no appropriate instrument to provide significant support to this 
outcome, except for one ESW that aimed at privatizing financial institutions.  The Financial 
Sector Dialogue which was satisfactory focused on (a) strengthening central bank capacity to 
enforce regulations and the new prudential rules, (b) modernizing corporate accounting and audit 
standards, and (c) supporting the government in privatizing public financial institutions.  This 
was a continuation of the reforms undertaken in the context of the successful Financial Sector 
Adjustment Credit (1997-1999), mainly with respect to restructuring four public banks and 
modernizing the payments system.  The restructuring is still at its very early stages of planning, 
and in this context, the Bank recently provided the government with terms of reference of the 
financial audits of the banks, and the terms of reference for the operational restructuring.           

E. 

CAS Strategic Pillar III: Building and Protecting Human Resources.  Moderately 
Satisfactory     

40. 
Human Development Indicators in Yemen are very low and this pillar is relevant to the 
country’s long-term strategic goals.  The CAS supported and complemented government’s 
strategy.  While expecting the government to focus on public campaigns to reduce population 
growth to the targeted 3 percent in 2005, the CAS focused mainly on basic education, and on 
girls’ and women education, in particular (in Yemen, fewer than 40 percent of girls under 12 
attend schools).  In addition, the CAS envisaged building human capital through improving 
health and nutrition; enhancing early childhood development; and improving access to 
information and communication technology.  However, despite its focus on education, the CAS 
did not highlight the multi-sectoral dimension of this pillar in designing its interventions.  For 
instance, with the exception of the Child Development Project, the CAS did not highlight the 
linkages between drinking water scarcity and the consequent chronic health and therefore 
education constraints31.    

31 In the case of Morocco, for example, where drinking water scarcity is also a major problem, an increased water 
access of population from 20 to 50 percent in 27 rural provinces led to a reduction in water transport time.  The 
saved water transport time spurred a rise in girls’ primary enrollment from 30 to 51 percent.  

 
 
 
                                                 
 
- 16 - 

41. 
Pillar achievements as compared to CAS goals.  Achievements under this pillar are 
rated Moderately Satisfactory because of the major achievements in the education sector in 
general (Box 2), and achievements in narrowing the gender gap in particular, and because of the 
unsatisfactory achievements in the health sector.  Gross enrollment rates of girls exceeded their 
target and reached 62 percent in 2005 in targeted areas as compared to 51 percent in 1999-2000.  
In secondary education, total rural enrollments increased by 38 percent in 2002-2003 (compared 
to 1998-1999 baseline). However, while attention to access was adequate and resulted in 
exceptional increases in enrollment rates in rural areas, attention to the quality of education was 
modest and substantial work remains to be done.  Despite the fact that quality of basic education 
is expected to improve as a result of training 95 percent of the teachers (as compared to a target 
of 80 percent), it is important to note that not enough teachers were assigned to rural areas.  
Health outcomes were not achieved due to the ambitious design of the Bank’s assistance given 
the weak local implementation capacity.  Health service coverage was not expanded to 65 
percent of the population, as projected; Government expenditure on health was only 1.5 percent 
in 2003, lower than the targeted 2.2 percent of GDP; and fertility rates and child and maternal 
mortality did not decline.                  

42. 
Bank Assistance.  The assistance consisted of nine ongoing projects, six new projects (of 
which three were delivered) and twelve non-lending services (of which seven were conducted).  
The following table lists the operations proposed to support pillar III of the CAS.     

Table 6: BANK ASSISTANCE UNDER PILLAR III 

Ongoing  Lending at 
start of CAS 

Actual Lending 

Actual 
ESW/TA 

1.  Higher Education 
2.  Health Reform 
Support 
3.  Basic Education 
Expansion Project 
(BEEP) 
4.  Child 
Development 
5.  Social Fund II 
6.  Public Works II 
7.  Vocational 
Training  
8.  Education Sector 
Investment Project 
9. Rural Access I 

1.  Basic 
Education  
Development  
2. Social Fund III 
3.  Public Works 
III (not 
programmed) 

1.  Poverty Update 
2.  EPI and Public 
Health Programs 
3.  Women in the 
local economy of 
Aden 
4.  Gender Note 
5. Vocational 
Training Strategy 
6.  Develop. 
Information Center 
7. Population  
 Policy Note 

Planned new 
lending not 
delivered 
1.  Girls’ 
secondary 
education project  
2.  Vocational 
Training  II  
3.  Rural Access II 

Planned New ESW/TA 
not delivered 

1.  Secondary Education 
Review 
2. Children at Risk 
3. Violence against 
women 
4. Development Research 
Forum 
5. M&E capacity building 

 
 
 
 
 
 
- 17 - 

Box 2:  WHY DOES THE EDUCATION SECTOR CONTINUE TO DELIVER RESULTS IN YEMEN AND NOT 
OTHER SECTORS? 
Lessons behind the Results on the Ground 

Government Commitment: The Government of Yemen has historically given priority to education. The share of 
GDP going to education increased from 5.2 percent in 1997 to 6.8 percent in 2004, with education accounting for 22 
percent of total government expenditures. Strong leadership of the Ministry of Education has maintained the focus 
on expanding educational access to the entire country, with particular attention to disadvantaged groups. While 
equitable expansion remains a high priority, the government is committed to promoting sound strategies at all levels 
to respond more flexibly to evolving demand for education and training.  
Clear and Simple Implementation Arrangements with Focus on Capacity Building:  In 1999, the education sector 
assistance strategy of the Bank laid the foundations for the design of the BEEP, based on simple implementation 
procedures. The preparation of the subsequent Basic Education Development Project (BEDP) was supported by a 
number of studies, including a review of cost effective construction to enhance efficiency. The strong performance 
of the BEEP and EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund in the most difficult districts is attributed in part to the clear and simple 
implementation arrangements that have been put into place. The pace of implementation and relative transparency in 
procurement were achieved through heavy investment by the project unit in ensuring that the rules of the game were 
well understood and followed. In the 2004 Independent Procurement Review for Yemen, the BEEP was the only one 
of the seven projects reviewed to be rated Satisfactory on general transparency. The same level of support continues 
under the BEDP which covers 10 new governorates and for which the Ministry is recruiting procurement specialists 
to train governorate staff. On a systemic level, efforts are on-going to rationalize teacher deployment and the 
inspectors’ corps in coordination with the civil service work in progress; to build national capacity for education 
assessment and international benchmarking of the learning achievements of Yemeni students; and to utilize school 
mapping in making school construction decisions. 
Donor Harmonization and Resource Mobilization: The education sector is the furthest along in Yemen in donor 
harmonization and resource mobilization, with a Partnership Declaration signed by 12 donors. The education donors 
worked as partners with the government in drafting the Basic Education Development Strategy and they review the 
strategy annually with the government (the second annual exercise is planned for May 2006). There are two cases of 
multi-donor financing arrangements: through the EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund; and through the multi-donor Trust Fund 
resources (non-pooled funding by DfID and NL) under the Basic Education Development Project (BEDP). The 
BEDP is a pre-SWAp operation which KfW is joining in 2006 and the Canadians have expressed interest in joining. 
Donors participate in BEDP missions and meet monthly to review progress on donor harmonization. Yemen’s 
success in joining the first group of countries to benefit from the EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund, followed by its 
demonstrated ability to use the funds for educational advancements, enabled the country to build on its success and 
qualify for two further grants. The country received a lot of international recognition, which fostered a positive trend 
to deliver more. The continuation of the Ministry leadership has of course helped tremendously in maintaining the 
momentum on achieving results.   
Bank Leadership in Supporting Analytical and Strategic Work: The Bank has been the lead agency in the country 
providing analytical support for the development of educational strategies which have been used as a basis for 
systemic changes supported by the entire donor community.  Intensive support was provided to the articulation of 
the Basic Education Development Strategy and the development of Yemen’s Credible Plan, which formed the basis 
for receiving financing from the EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund. The Bank has also been supporting the government’s 
development of strategic priorities for vocational training, secondary and higher education. The resulting strategies 
will form the basis for donor financing and support in these sub-sectors. The Bank is leading a study on the issue of 
teacher absenteeism to support improved teacher management in the education system.  The Bank is also leading 
support to the Government to formulate a children and youth strategy and action plans to translate that strategy into 
concrete actions as well as linkage with all sectors.  In sum, the Bank’s role has been one of central importance both 
for the development of policy and for attracting donor funding to augment IDA’s limited envelope.   

 
 
 
- 18 - 

Outcome III.1:  Increased access to and quality of education at all levels, with emphasis on  
     girls and women   

43. 
The Bank program supported education development through Education Sector 
Projects, the Child Development, Social Fund and Public Works projects.   Both basic 
(Grades 1-9) and secondary education (10-12) were supported and there was increased access (as 
measured by enrolment rates) at both levels of education.  

44. 
Basic Education.  The basic education sector was the first sector in Yemen to adopt a 
Sector Wide Approach and over a period of several years, the Government defined its sector 
strategy and donors began to align their programs with this strategy.   The World Bank’s 
contribution included: its support to the Government in implementing the sector-wide approach, 
its assistance in fund raising from the Education For All Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI) and 
other donors and through IDA projects.   

45. Outcomes achieved are summarized as follows: Gross enrollment rates of girls in four 
targeted governorates reached 62 percent exceeding its target of 57 percent.  Ninety-five percent 
of teachers in grades 1-6 have participated in annual refresher training (vs. a target of 80 
percent).  A Girls Education Sector Department has recently been established in the Ministry of 
Education, and 98 percent of the US$10 million grant of the Education For All Fast Track 
Initiative (EFA-FTI) Catalytic Fund was spent satisfactorily within the twelve month period set 
for implementation.    

Table 7: PROGRESS ON BEEP OUTCOME INDICATORS 

Progress on BEEP Outcome Indicators 

Baseline 
1999/2000 
Gross Enrollment Rate for girls in grades 1 to 6 51 percent 
Girls’ share in increased enrollments is at least 
- 
60 percent 

Target 
(2005/2006) 
57 percent 
60 percent 

Progress as of 
September 2005 
62 percent 
55 percent 

46. 
The new Basic Education Development project planned in FY04 was delayed but was 
eventually approved in FY05 and will continue to improving enrollment and completion rates in 
basic education with particular attention to girls’ education beyond the CAS period - it became 
effective only in March 2005 and was implemented for only a few months before CAS 
completion.  In addition, 470,000 children were enrolled in Basic Education through the support 
of the  Second Social Fund for Development32; and an additional 26,317 children were enrolled 
through the Second Public Works Project which constructed 825 classrooms. 

47. 
Secondary Education.  The Bank contributed to a substantial expansion in secondary 
enrolments particularly in girls’ secondary enrolments as noted in the Table 8. 

32 SFD I closed at the end of June 2003 but was largely disbursed by June 2002 and therefore is not taken into 
account for this CASCR. 

 
 
                                                 
 
- 19 - 

Table 8: SECONDARY EDUCATION ENROLLMENTS 

Rural 

  Girls 
  Total 
   percent Girls 
Urban 

  Girls 
  Total 

   percent Girls 

Enrollments in Grades 10-12 
2002/03 

60,406 
292,081 
21 percent 
2002/03 

101,218 
257,282 

39 percent 

Enrollments in Grades 7-12 
2002/03 

  Girls 
  Total 

1,364,129 
   percent Girls 
39 percent 
Source: Education Sector Investment Project ICR 

533,777 

 percent increase compared to 
1998/99 
120 percent 
54 percent 
43 percent 
 percent increase compared to 
1998/99 
53 percent 
38 percent 

11 percent 

 percent increase compared to 
1998/99 

224 percent 
116 percent 
50 percent 

48. 
The main IDA support in secondary education was provided through the Education 
Sector Investment Project. The project helped improve girls’ access to secondary education 
by creating 17,500 new places through the construction of classrooms and the training of 
250 female teachers in math, science, and English.  After overcoming initial implementation 
problems due to complex and ambitious design and substantial restructuring, the project 
eventually achieved results although it was extended and then closed in September 2004 – three 
years later than the original closing date.  The Secondary Education Review (FY04) which aimed 
at identifying the needs for assistance at the secondary level, especially for girls, was delayed 
until FY06. This review was a collaborative effort with the Ministry of Education, and the 
priority for the Ministry's capacity in FY04-05 was to meet the demands of launching the new 
Basic Education Development Project. In line with the timing of the sector work, the proposed 
Girls’ Secondary Education Project (FY05), which was intended to support the expansion in 
primary education to enable them to move to secondary education has been delayed till FY07. 

49. 
Vocational Training.  The Bank succeeded in initiating the policy dialogue between the 
government and the private sector on sector reforms and helped endorse a Vocational Training 
(VT)  strategy that makes VT system a demand-driven one in accordance with country’s needs.  
In addition, the government issued a decree that provides more autonomy to the VT centers.   

50. 
The main IDA support for VT was provided through the VT Project which closed in 
December 2003 and disbursed only limited funds (approximately US$1 million out of US$15 
million) during the CAS period.  The project focused on (i) strengthening  the management of 
the VT system by providing a major role to the private sector in policy-making, management and 
financing of the VT system; and (ii) improving the quality and relevance of VT through the 
enhancement of programs in existing centers33.   However, the project was complex (involving 

33 Due to delays in Government action, funding from the Dutch and the Japanese did not eventually become 
available and a third component to reorient adult education and training (AET) programs for women through 

 
 
                                                 
- 20 - 

several ministries) and focused on reforming the delivery system (which had not been the 
previous focus).  While the project enhanced the capacity for developing curricula and train 
trainers, including training of handicapped people, within the industry, other crucial sectors such 
as agriculture, commerce, and trade were not involved.  Furthermore, private sector involvement 
was limited; the expected establishment of women’s vocational training center was cancelled, 
and adult education programs for women were not achieved.   

51. 
Bank’s contribution to improvements to Community Colleges led to achieving a high 
employment rate of graduates.  A tracer study of the first 100 graduates of the two colleges 
financed by the Education Sector Investment Project showed graduate employment rates of more 
than 80 percent, with a high satisfaction of employers with the graduates’ skills.  Building on the 
success of this initiative, the project established an institutional basis for further expansion.   

52. 
Improving the links between the supply and the demand for technical skills was the 
main focus of a Vocational Training Strategy (FY04), and will be further accomplished through 
the Second Vocational Training Project (FY07). The strategy was delivered in October 2004 and 
the project was delayed from FY05 to FY07.  The main issue raised during project preparation 
was related to the approach to the institutional basis for the Skills Development Fund (SDF) 
component of the proposed project. This was due to disagreements among stakeholders 
concerning the governance and operating procedures of the Fund.  The issue was finally resolved 
with the Bank’s support at a Policy Forum in July 2005 and project processing has resumed after 
the end of the CAS period.   

53. Higher Education.  The CAS established an ambitious outcome indicator of a 25 percent 
increase in enrollment in science, technology, and foreign languages with a view of supporting 
capacity across public and private sectors, which was not achieved within the CAS period.  
However, the Bank succeeded in developing a national strategy for higher education which was 
then finalized beyond the CAS period and will be endorsed at a national workshop in early 2006.  
The strategy emphasizes the critical role of higher education in relation to supporting economic 
development of growth in Yemen as well as improving the quality of the education system itself.  
The program to support this outcome was reflected in the modest Higher Education Learning and 
Innovation Credit of US$5 million which became effective at the start of the CAS period 
(September 2002).  In addition to developing a national strategy for higher education, the project 
aimed at building capacity and piloting a number of innovations to build the foundation, and 
inform the design of a comprehensive higher education operation.  However, the project faced 
implementation challenges during its first two years of implementation (primarily problems with 
retaining a project manager and lack of familiarity with IDA procurement procedures). 

Outcome III.2:  Improved coverage and quality of health services  

54. 
Implementation of health projects in Yemen has been challenging, and since 1989, 
none of the five approved projects achieved their intended objectives, with the exception of 
Health Development I (FY90 exit).  Most of the projects had similar objectives and while a 
limited amount of infrastructure, equipment, and training was provided, none of those efforts was 

community participation was dropped as were plans under the second component for selective expansion of two 
pilot centers. 

                                                                                                                                                             
- 21 - 

sustainable and none of the projects had any substantial institutional development impact.  
Achievement of this outcome was expected to be measured by: increase in health service 
coverage (to 65 percent of the population); increase in Government expenditure on health to 2.2 
percent of GDP; reduction in child and maternal mortality; and increase in contraceptive use and 
reduction in fertility rates.  The choice of these indicators needs to be reviewed from two 
perspectives.   First, given the primacy of the issue of population control, the narrow focus on 
reducing fertility rates through higher use of contraceptives was inadequate.  Greater focus 
should have been undertaken to the multi-sectoral nature of the solution (e.g. the long-term 
impact of girl’s education particularly secondary education in reducing fertility rates).  Second, 
the achievement of these indicators was predicated on a fundamental shift towards integration of 
service delivery.  This integration did not occur, largely because the health reform program 
which was to provide the framework for integration was never adopted in earnest.  Moreover, the 
Government's decentralization program continues to challenge the ability of the Ministry of 
Public Health and Population (MOPHP) to effectively manage the delivery of health services: 
investment decisions are made by the local authorities, leaving the central MOPHP to equip, 
staff, and run the facilities which may not be in areas considered priority by the MOPHP.  Given 
this lack of strategic framework, and the inability of the central MOPHP to control investment 
decisions, the improvement in indicators in the PRSP progress report toward achieving coverage 
targets (63 percent) may not reflect on the ground realities.   Finally, the PER for the Health 
Sector (2005) found Government expenditures on health to be 1.5 percent of GDP in 2003 
(significantly less than the 2.2 percent of GDP target of the CAS program).   

55. 
Bank’s achievement of this outcome is currently unsatisfactory due to the ambitious 
design of the ongoing Health Reform Support Project.    The Bank’s project was expected to 
provide a Package of Integrated Maternal and Child (PIMAC) health services to 1.5 million 
people (in 8 districts in 4 governorates); and improve effectiveness of national public health 
programs and resource allocation within the public health sector.  With regard to PIMAC, to 
which over 70 percent of the project resources were allocated, there were two implementation 
problems:  first, efforts to integrate services which had traditionally been provided through 
vertical programs did not succeed.  Second, translating selection criteria into agreement on the 
actual districts where the project would be implemented took until September 2004 (i.e. two and 
a half years into implementation).  Given extremely slow progress and low disbursements (less 
than 10 percent of the credit amount of US$27.53 million), the Mid-term Review of the project 
in July 2005 was used as the basis for restructuring the component.  A decision was taken to 
scale back to selected vertical programs (including immunization), minimize investments in 
facilities and limit integration of services at the point of service delivery and defer actual 
program integration to a future Health Sector Review process.  An organization and management 
study to guide the overall development of the health system in project governorates/districts was 
also recommended.  While these restructuring decisions are being implemented, the project’s 
implementation and development objective were still rated as “Moderately Unsatisfactory” in 
February 2006. 

56. 
As noted earlier, the Bank attempted to include health, nutrition, water and education 
within one project umbrella (The Child Development Project) in targeted districts in 6 selected 
governorates.  However, although the explicit recognition of the multi-sectoral linkages was a 
laudable approach, the Bank has not succeeded in addressing the complexity of implementing 
several diverse components through one single project.  This resulted in unsatisfactory 

- 22 - 

outcomes and close to US$6 million (20 percent of the credit) being undisbursed when the 
project closed as of December 31, 2005.  This multi-sectoral approach should have been 
established in a strategic and integrated manner in the context of the CAS framework as a whole.  
The CCR attempts to address this aspect by highlighting some cross-sectoral outcomes in the 
following section.   

57. 
Two other projects also contributed to health sector outcomes.  First, SFD II was 
involved with the construction of health facilities and it is estimated that close to an additional 
one million people gained access to health units. However, given the problems with the 
functioning of the health system, the gain from these additional facilities is questionable.  
Second, PWP II financed construction of 92 rooms in health centers and modest amounts of 
immunization against tetanus (475 women) and hepatitis (812 persons) and vaccination against 
six childhood diseases (1550 children).  

CROSS-SECTORAL OUTCOMES  

Infrastructure Support to Education (Outcome III.1) and Health (Outcome III.2)  

58. 
In addition to the availability of education and health facilities, in the context of Yemen’s 
isolated rural communities it was also necessary to focus on rural access roads.   These access 
roads assisted not only access to facilities but also access to markets for village agricultural 
outputs as well as for incoming essential commodities. 

59. 
The first phase of the Rural Access Adaptable Program Credit  (APC) which commenced 
in 2001 and was to be implemented throughout the CAS period, is well on its way to achieving 
its outcome indicators of piloting rural access roads in 4 poverty affected areas and developing 
low-cost standards for rural roads construction.  The intermediate outcome of developing 
institutional capacity for rural roads program management has also been achieved.  The project 
was extended for 10 months (up to October 31, 2006).  At the end of the ten year program, the 
program was expected to reduce rural access times by 30 percent, costs of transport by 30 
percent, prices of essential commodities by 15 percent and to improve poverty and gender 
outcomes.   The triggers for the second phase of the Rural Access Adaptable Program Credit 
were not met during the CAS period.  

60. 
Bank’s achievement of infrastructure outcomes through the SFD and PWP is 
satisfactory.  First, the SFD’s impact on feeder roads was assessed as highly satisfactory ; SFD 
II connected 76 networks i.e. feeder roads which provided access to primary and secondary 
schools and health clinics.  As a result of the project, travel time and costs were reported to be 
reduced by 40 percent on average.  The strong community organization structure in Yemen 
and the major community participation dimension in this project will help sustain the 
maintenance of the roads.  Eighty-six percent of the beneficiary community of rural roads signed 
an agreement on road maintenance of completed sub-projects.  In addition, road maintenance 
follow-up committees have been established.  Second, through the PWP, more than 16 percent of 
Yemen’s population corresponding to about 5000 communities are now benefiting from the 
infrastructure improvements brought by the project. The impact of PWP on infrastructure 
services is not only highly satisfactory but also sustainable.  Assurances that future maintenance 
of sub-projects will be provided were obtained before approval.  The substantial institutional set-

 
 
- 23 - 

up of the project and the significant community participation were fundamental for its 
sustainability.    

Safety Nets 

61. 
Under PWP II – 92000 person months of work were provided.  SFD II promoted labor-
intensive activities and generated about 2.4 million person-days in temporary employment and 
about 11,000 additional permanent jobs.  The 2002 Poverty Report assessed that the targeting 
impact of SFD improved between SFD-I and SFD-II with more funds reaching the poor.  
However, the PWP funds were not as well targeted being spread across both the poor and the 
non-poor. 

Community Development 

62. 
The SFD benefited about 40 percent of the total population (7 million people) of which 
49 percent are female, and generated 8,000 permanent jobs.  By making poor communities as 
part of the solution, SFD projects contributed substantially to meeting CAS outcome.  SFD 
undertook a participatory outcome-based approach to implement three main programs: 
community development related to social development and infrastructure, capacity building, and 
micro-finance.  In essence, it is more about helping the poor help themselves rather than simply 
focusing on providing assistance.  SFD’s approach based on evaluations at every stage of the 
project cycle to assess processes and outcomes and take timely and effective corrective 
measures, helped achieve the intended results satisfactorily.   SFD’s value-added lies in cost 
effective innovations in school design, water harvesting, rehabilitation of traditional water 
systems, and outreach to special needs groups.    

63. 
SFD II established a demand-driven mechanism that: improved the living conditions of 
the poor through community development services and supported income-generating activities 
through the development of small and micro-enterprises.  The project targeted the poorest 
households, with 17 percent of its resources benefiting the poorest decile, 31 percent benefiting 
the poorest quintile, and 44 percent benefiting the poorest three deciles.   

Gender 

64. Girls Education.  The CAS helped provide the enabling conditions for Girls’ education 
and contributed to reducing the gender gap, but sustainability remains an issue.  In the SFD 
beneficiary communities, girls’ enrollment rates were almost 20 percent higher than in the 
comparison group, the proportion of girls enrolled increasing from 42 percent in 1999 to 56 
percent in 2003.  The Child Development project focuses on improving the ratio of girls to boys 
enrolled in grade 1 reaching grade 6 by at least 15 per cent in the 6 pilot governorates and 
improving the minimum level of learning of girls by at least 80 percent.   

65. Gender analytical work has made a significant difference in including gender issues 
in the national dialogue. Through a Gender Assessment Note, it assisted the government in 
developing a National Gender Strategy approved by the Prime Minister. Despite its use in the 
national strategy, the Gender Note was never finalized and publicly issued. Gender issues were 
also addressed in the context of other initiatives: for example, in the context of the Port Cities 

 
 
 
- 24 - 

Development project, a note was prepared on Women in Local Economic Development in Aden 
and was published in December 2006. Similarly, in the context of IFC’s Private Enterprise 
Partnership (PEP MENA) Program, a women entrepreneur’s training workshop was held in June 
2005.   

Children At Risk   

66. 
The grant to develop programs that will support Children at Risk (FY04) did not 
materialize and the objective of implementing programs to deal with children at risk, including 
housing for 2,500 homeless children and care centers for 6,750 was not achieved.  However, 
analytical work on children at risk provided the basis to initiate dialogue at a national level on 
sensitive issues such as the magnitude and situation of child laborers, HIV/AIDS; and provided 
the basis to begin the mainstreaming process and integration of specific activities for at-risk 
children in the SFD and Basic Education Enhancement Projects.     

Research and Knowledge Sharing 

67. With the support of the Bank and other donors, a Development Research Forum (FY03) 
was to be established as an independent Think Tank to Monitor and Evaluate the PRSP, and 
engage in policy research. None of those expected results was achieved.   

68. 
A Development Information Center (FY04) was to be established in order to bring 
Yemen closer to the rest of the world in terms of information sharing, training, and research.   
The Bank signed a three-year agreement with the National Information Center (NIC) to establish 
a Development Information Network (DIN), specifically a Public Information Facility (PIF) - 
where Bank publications would be made available to the public - and a Distance Learning Center 
(DLC) - where training, meetings, etc. could take place over video conference with other 
countries.  The Bank also signed an agreement with the University of Sana’a to establish a Public 
Information Center which is now operational.  The DLC is not yet operational due to high 
monthly costs which the Telecommunications Ministry would charge the NIC; this matter is still 
to be resolved.   

F. 

Strategic Pillar IV:  Sustaining and Protecting Natural Resources.  Moderately 
Unsatisfactory 

69. 
The CAS identified five major areas of intervention: addressing depletion of groundwater 
through efficient irrigation technology and better management of groundwater; addressing the 
loss of soil and watershed through extending modern techniques to rainfed farms and livestock 
management, and through reduction of flood incidence; reducing pollution through regulation 
and sanitation investments; mitigating the risk of depletion of fish stocks through better stock 
management; and mitigating the risk of depletion of petroleum through power sector reform, and 
through non-oil exports promotion.   This evaluation focuses on the first three outcomes (which 
are considered as one integrated set of water and sanitation outcomes) and on the fourth outcome 
on fish resources. The fifth outcome on diversification (petroleum depletion and non-oil exports) 
has been considered in the context of the investment climate outcomes.  The CAS should have 
integrated this outcome under pillar II of business environment.     

 
 
- 25 - 

70. 
Pillar Achievements as compared to CAS goals.  The institutional framework for 
water sector development improved during the CAS period, although modestly.  A water 
law was passed and provided a legal basis for treating irrigation and municipal water as a single 
source.  Satisfactory progress towards sustainable water use through rehabilitation and 
modernization of infrastructure, and through participatory irrigation management was made.  
Exhaustion of groundwater and soil is being addressed appropriately, but it is too early to 
evaluate the final achievement at this stage.  In Urban Water Supply and Sanitation, availability 
of piped water increased from once a week to once every four days, and urgent needs of 7,500 
and 5,000 households for sewer and water systems respectively were addressed.   

71. 
Bank Assistance.  The achievement of pillar IV outcomes depended on the success of 
four ongoing projects, three new projects (all delivered) and five ESW activities (of which four 
were delivered): 

Table 9:  BANK ASSISTANCE UNDER PILLAR IV 

Ongoing  Lending at start 
of CAS 

Actual 
Lending 

Actual 
ESW/TA 

1.Taiz Municipal 
development  
2. Rural water supply & 
sanitation 
3. Sana’a water supply & 
sanitation 
4. Irrigation Improvement  

1.  Sana’a Basin 
Water management 
2. Ground water & 
soil conservation 
3. Urban water 
supply & sanitation 

1.  Country Water 
Resources Assistance 
Strategy 
2.  Coastal Aquifers 
Development Strategy 
3. Environmental 
Safeguards  
4. Rural Energy 
(ESMAP) 

Planned New 
Lending not 
delivered 
None 

Planned New 
ESW/TA not 
delivered 
1. Fisheries 
Management 
Support 

Outcome IV.1:  Improved conditions for water availability in place, through strengthened 
   water depletion mitigation measures 

72. Water scarcity being a major environmental/sustainability challenge in Yemen is an issue 
that has been known since the 1970s.   The PRSP correctly noted that one of the key solutions to 
raising incomes and reducing poverty is agriculture water use efficiency.  As most of the water 
used for irrigation is pumped out of the aquifer, the subsidized prices of diesel play a key role in 
water over use.  While increasing the price of diesel would normally be expected to move 
farmers towards higher value added crops, the problem in Yemen is the dominance of qat as 
probably the highest value added crops34.   There was also the need to improve traditional 
systems of rainfed agriculture in order to prevent the significant soil erosion that occurs.  Hence, 
the focus of the CAS on groundwater exhaustion was relevant. 

73. 
However, water conservation (primarily in the agriculture sector which accounts for 90 
percent of water use in Yemen) needs to be accompanied by increasing water supply (and 
importantly also sanitation) to a largely under-served population.  This dual challenge is not 
clearly acknowledged in the CAS outcome which focuses on water use outcome only.  It is, 
however, unclear how the human development outcomes could have been achieved without the 
water supply and sanitation services.  The scale of the water supply and sanitation problem is 

34 This problem was highlighted in the Bank’s 1999 Agriculture Strategy document. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
- 26 - 

large; for example, in order for Yemen to achieve water and sanitation MDGs, substantial 
increases in rural coverage will be necessary as shown in Table 10.   

Table 10:  WATER AND SANITATION INDICATORS AND MDGS 

Rural water supply coverage 
target 
Rural sanitation coverage target 
Population served 
   Water supply 
   Sanitation 
Total rural population 
   Source: CWRAS, 2005 

Base (2000-2003) 
25 percent 

MDGs (2015) 
65 percent 

20 percent 

3.4 million 
2.8 million 
13.8 million 

52 percent 

13.6 million 
10.9 million 
20.9 million 

74. 
Achievements under this outcome can be summarized as follows:  The institutional 
framework for water sector development improved during the CAS period in part due to the 
Bank’s assistance through its interventions.  A Water law was passed in FY03 and provided 
better clarity on the priorities and regulatory framework of the sector.  The law also defined the 
role of the National Water Resources Authority (NWRA) in water resources management, and 
reinforced decentralization.  However, although public awareness was judged to be high, the 
impact on change in people’s behaviors was negligible due to subsidized diesel prices.   A new 
Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) to unify agencies dealing with water issues was 
created; the water sector was reorganized; and an expectation that the ongoing reforms would 
have a higher impact was raised.   The National Water Sector Strategic Investment Plan was 
formulated in 2004 and provided a sector investment framework for the first time. 

75. 
The Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy (CWRAS, FY05) identified the 
Bank’s proposed operational response to seven ongoing reforms: (i) Incentive structure; (ii) 
Urban water supply and sanitation reforms; (iii) Water conservation in agriculture; (iv) 
Improvement of public expenditure quality; (v) Decentralization, community partnership, and 
self-regulation; (vi) Water policy and strategy; and (vii) Rural water supply and sanitation.   The 
Bank therefore has the opportunity to continue the dialogue on water issues beyond the CAS 
period on the basis of sound analysis (CWRAS).  Sector work and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Framework for its implementation were good steps forward.  Although it is too early to 
assess the impact of the new CWRAS, it is worth noting that this is the first time the Bank 
undertakes a program approach to the water sector in Yemen considering the linkages between 
rural and urban uses, and institutional reforms.   

76. 
Public expenditures in the irrigation and urban water sector.  On the expenditure 
side, the Bank’s Public Expenditure Review (PER) had a positive impact on the quality of public 
expenditures in the irrigation and urban water sector.  Some results are noteworthy:  with regard 
to depletion of water, recommendations were made to eliminate public support for groundwater 
in favor of investments in water use efficiency and in improving sustainable spate schemes; and 
industry benchmarks were introduced for urban water.  The PER concluded that many resources 
were wasted in developing small dams whose design was not sound and did not improve basin 
efficiency.  

 
 
 
 
- 27 - 

77. 
Spate Irrigation.  Through the Irrigation Improvement Project (FY01) the Bank is 
making satisfactory progress towards sustainable water use in two spate irrigation schemes (in 
Tuban and Zabid), covering 26,000 ha, through rehabilitation and modernization of 
infrastructure, and through participatory 
irrigation management (PIM) with the 
establishment of Water User Associations and Irrigation Councils.  Sustainability of the 
schemes would be ensured through Government budget and user contributions.  Further, Bank’s 
support 
is expected 
to 
increase agricultural productivity and rural 
incomes 
through 
implementation of an intensive demonstration program.  The Irrigation Improvement Project is 
the first phase of an adaptable program credit (APC) to be completed by June 2006 and now 
extended to June 2007.  The second phase of the APC would be initiated when the triggers are 
met and it would cover the remaining five spate irrigation schemes.  The Southern Governorates 
Agricultural Privatization project was also involved with the improvements to spate irrigation 
structures, affected 3,530 hectares (and over 14,000 farmers), and erosion control and wadi 
protection activities affected another 9,000 hectares benefiting 57,000 people.   

78. Groundwater and Soil Conservation.   Although no measurable outcomes are available 
at this stage, as Bank’s interventions started later than planned, it is noteworthy that the CAS 
adequately highlighted the exhaustion of groundwater and soil as key issues, and that the 
proposed assistance is relevant to addressing those issues. The ongoing Groundwater & Soil 
Conservation project addresses the issue of aquifer exhaustion from excessive agricultural use 
and the associated deteriorating recharge conditions in the watershed.  This project’s 
development objective is to help improve water use efficiency through: (i) introducing water 
saving technologies (improved groundwater conveyance systems for 27,000 hectares and 
localized on-farm irrigation for 1,700 hectares); (ii) increasing surface and groundwater 
availability through rehabilitation of small to medium spate irrigation schemes, terrace 
rehabilitation, bank protection works and other water and soil conservation activities; and (iii) 
establishing a groundwater management framework and institution to manage local water 
resources sustainably through capacity building of government water institutions and community 
groups. The institutional component addresses some of the criticisms of the CAE and supports 
the institutional development of key sector institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Irrigation; the Ministry of Water & Environment; and the National Water Resources Authority.   
The institutional development activities supported include: demonstration farms and wells; the 
establishment of an Irrigation Advisory Service; a public awareness campaign and the 
establishment of Water User Associations. The project will be implemented through October 
2009. 

79. 
The Sana’a Basin Water Management Project is an Adaptable Program Credit (APC) 
operation, over 15 years, to be implemented in three phases. The Program Objective is to seek 
long-term solutions and promote sustainable groundwater management in the Sana'a Basin. 
Ultimately, given the recharge of the deep aquifer is very limited, the key goal is to extend the 
life span of the aquifer through reductions in groundwater abstractions through irrigation 
efficiency improvements.   The first five-year phase of the Project (approved in late FY02 and to 
be implemented through the end of FY09) focuses on: increasing the efficiency of agricultural 
water use within the Sana'a Basin; and accelerating aquifer recharge to allow for a gradual shift 
to a less water-based rural economy.  The objectives will be attained through the following 
components: (i) demand management and irrigation improvement; (ii) supply management and 
recharge improvement; (iii) institutional development and capacity building (improving the 

- 28 - 

analytical data base for water resources management); (iv) information and public awareness; (v) 
environmental management and mitigation program; (vi) project management and monitoring; 
and (vii) follow-on-project preparation.  The objective of this project is also relevant to the CAS 
and PRSP, and addresses CAE’s concern as it focuses on demand management and on 
institutional capacity building, through the improvement of the analytical and database for water 
resources management.  Despite some implementation delays, the project’s outcomes are 
likely to be achieved on the grounds that irrigation improvement efforts are in place and 
farmer demand for efficient irrigation technology is rising.  There is however a concern that 
the equity in benefits for the irrigation investments to poor farmers may not be addressed.  

80. 
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation.  Bank program for the Rural Water and Sanitation 
sector was implemented through the ongoing Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (RWSS, 
approved in FY2001), and the activities under the SFD II, Public Works II and Child 
Development Projects.  

81. 
The RWSS Project introduced a demand-driven and participatory approach designed to 
ensure RWSS schemes coverage in six governorates; and assisting the government in 
strengthening local capacity.  The project has been extended by eighteen months to June 2007 
and is likely to achieve its development objective for construction and/or rehabilitation of 130 
RWS projects serving a total of 400,000 people in six governorates.  The associated rural 
sanitation and hygiene education are more modest and also likely to be achieved.   

82. 
Similarly, the SFD II also funded water harvesting schemes.  However, its projects have 
been less successful in improving the well-being and economic integration of its target 
population.  Women and children still have to collect and carry water from most of SFD II water 
schemes, and the water from open cisterns and dams is unsuitable for drinking without 
treatment35.       

83. 
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation.  Three projects supported this outcome:  the 
Sana’a Water Supply and Sanitation Project (SWSSP) which closed in June 2003; Taiz 
Municipal Development Project; and the Urban Water Supply and Sanitation APC Phase I.   
Under Sana’a Water Supply and Sanitation Project, Bank’s intervention contributed to: 
increasing the availability of piped water from once a week to once every four days; 
reducing unaccounted for water; and addressing the urgent needs of 7,500 and 5,000 
households for sewer and water systems respectively.  It also contributed to transforming the 
Sana’a Water and Sanitation Authority into an efficient and technically and financially well 
performing corporation but the corporation could not comply with the project’s revenue 
covenants.  However, its progress laid the ground to corporatize other branches of the Authority.  
Due to lack of specific attention to water resources management, IEG rated the outcome of this 
intervention (SWSSP) as Moderately Satisfactory36.     

84. 
Bank’s assistance under the Urban Water and Sanitation Project APC (UWSS, FY03) 
sought to achieve four objectives: a significant increase in water supply and sewerage services in 
project cities; establishment of a sectoral regulator and local corporations in Al-Hodeida, Al-

35 Source: SFD II ICR 
36 “abstraction of groundwater was 1.5 times recharge, and the water table was declining at about 6 meters per 
annum.” PPAR on water. 

                                                 
- 29 - 

Mukalla and Taiz; increase in private sector participation in Sana’a; and improved eligibility of 
the project cities for on-lending under the second phase of the project.  The assistance remains 
relevant to the CAS and PRSP.  The project is currently undergoing its Mid-Term Review and is 
reviewing the impact of accumulated implementation delays, and the progress towards the 
triggers to move to phase 2 of the APC.   

85. 
Flood Protection.  Over the past three years, the loss of life due to flooding has been 
reduced by 50 percent in Taiz and eliminated altogether in project-affected areas.  Damages to 
residences have been reduced by 98 percent over the past three years and damages to businesses 
reduced by 50 percent city-wide. Those achievements were accomplished through the Taiz 
Municipal Development and Flood protection Project that financed 8 km of flood protection 
structures to protect city residents and businesses from seasonal flash floods.   

THE ISSUE OF QAT   
86. 
This was a difficult issue with many implications – on water use, on health and on 
productivity of the workforce – and the 2001 CAE criticized the Bank for not taking sufficient 
actions on the qat issue. The CAE noted that “IDA could have argued that qat production should 
be neither protected nor subsidized; it could have urged import liberalization for qat as part of 
trade liberalization”. The PRSP did not identify the production and consumption of qat as an 
issue except with regard to the high usage of irrigated water.  In line with the PRSP, the CAS 
program matrix did not identify any direct actions on qat production and consumption37.  The 
only project to directly address this issue was the Groundwater and Soil Conservation Project but 
its contribution was limited to excluding qat farms from those farms that could benefit from 
project activities. The new CAS should address this question more substantively.  The challenge 
is that there is little social consensus in Yemen around the need to address this problem and it is 
likely that an extended period of changing social attitudes may be necessary.  

Box 3:  QAT CHALLENGES 

Qat plays a major economic role in the Yemeni economy. Qat’s contribution to GDP of 10 percent, including direct and indirect effects, 
equals two-thirds that of oil. One-third of agricultural GDP, the main source of income in the rural Yemen, is from Qat. Qat is the second 
largest employer, employing one in every seven working Yemeni, even surpassing employment in the public sector. 
The negative effects of Qat are grave. It depletes scarce water resources, deprives agricultural exports, lowers domestic savings, wastes 
human resources, and damages health. Since Qat is an irrigated crop with unmatched profitability, one-third of all ground water 
abstraction for all other uses (agricultural, industrial and residential) is utilized for Qat cultivation. The area under Qat has expanded 13-
fold in the last three decades, displacing areas that could have been planted with exportable coffee, fruits and vegetables. If the 
expenditures on Qat were to be saved, savings would have been higher by 5 percentage points of GDP.  If the poor families put the 
money spent on Qat to good use, the percentage of poor would be lower by 6 percentage points. The culture of spending extended 
afternoon hours chewing Qat is inimical to the development of a disciplined work ethics, with nearly one-quarter of usable working 
hours wasted. The adverse health effects of Qat are many: high blood-pressure, under-weight children (when pregnant women chew 
Qat), and cancer (from pesticide residues). 
Overcoming the obsession of chewing Qat is a critical and complex task for Yemenis. It is far too well integrated into the Yemeni 
economy and society to be abruptly ended without serious short-term adverse effects. Beyond prohibiting chewing Qat in government 
offices, the government and all other stakeholders in development must set up a campaign and rehabilitation policy that help Yemenis 
realize their full development potential. 
Source: DPR, 2006 

37 Production of qat accounts for one third of agricultural GDP, and absorbs a significant quantity of Yemen’s 
scarce water.   

                                                 
 
- 30 - 

Outcome IV.2: Efficient mitigation measures against depletion of other natural resources 
                          (coastal fisheries) and against pollution in place 

87. 
Under this outcome, the Bank conducted an environment Safeguards Review that aimed 
at strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Environment. 

88. 
The Fisheries Management Support and Agricultural and Maricultural Exports studies 
were not delivered as planned, and the expected delegation of coastal stock management duties 
to cooperatives and associations, along with the training programs were not achieved.   

V.  MEASURING BANK PERFORMANCE 

A. 

Quality of Products and Services 

A. 1:  Volume, Lending Instruments, and Costs   

89. 
The CAS projected IDA credits with a total Base-case amount of US$410 million.  
Actual IDA credits during FY03-05 totaled US$387.4 million representing 6 investment projects 
out of the planned 11 projects, and 1 not initially planned investment project [Public Works III].  
Of the 6 projects, 1 was an Adaptable Program Credit [Urban Water Supply and Sanitation].  
Although 5 projects were not delivered, the small gap between the planned IDA amount and the 
actual amount is explained by the increase in the credit amounts of 2 projects [Groundwater and 
Soil conservation; and Second Basic Education Expansion], and by the addition of the Public 
Works III project.  3 projects were rescheduled for FY06-07 and 2 projects were dropped [CSMP 
II; and District and Community Development].  The total cost of dropped projects stood at 
US$300,000 with the District and Community Development project contributing US$220,000.  
Average preparation costs were the highest in the region in FY03 (at US$619,000), but 
declined in the following years of the CAS period to below MNA’s average costs.              

A. 2:  Analytical and Advisory Services (AAA) 

90. 
The CAS highlighted the need for an increased focus on knowledge products and services 
to support long-term reform programs mainly in the area of public sector governance, and 
advocated the initiation of the Programmatic Non-Lending Services.  Several activities were 
planned in the CAS, however the lack of a monitoring system to track their delivery and 
dissemination made it difficult to get an accurate evaluation of the actual number of AAA and 
their impact.  In the new CAS period, there is room for improvement in dissemination and 
internal record-keeping.   

91. Most of the actual non-lending activities made progress late in the CAS period and 
therefore did not achieve their expected results; however, several unplanned activities were 
undertaken.  The unplanned “Budgetary and Poverty Impact of Petroleum Pricing” study made a 
significant impact, albeit with some disconnect in implementing the study’s recommendations.  
Other achievements made through AAA are in the Public Finance Management (PFM), anti-
corruption, and gender.  A PFM reform strategy was approved by the cabinet and a Ministerial 
committee was established to oversee the implementation of the PFM action plan; an anti-

 
 
 
     
 
 
- 31 - 

corruption commission was established following the CFAA’s recommendations; and analytical 
work on gender helped the government develop a National Gender Strategy.  However, 2 key 
products were delayed: the Development Policy Review and the survey results of the Investment 
Climate.  In addition to focusing on the strategic relevance, coherence, and cross-sectoral 
integration of the AAA, the new CAS should also ensure that inputs and processes are 
adequate, that timing is appropriate for maximum impact, and that dissemination and 
follow-up take place and are adequately monitored.     

A. 3:  Responsiveness to Clients  

92. 
The Country Office in Yemen played a major role in coordinating CAS activities and 
following-up on portfolio performance.  However, experienced Task Team Leaders need to be 
closer to the client to support implementation of reforms.  Most complex projects such as the 
Civil Service Modernization and Health projects, could have benefited from a greater 
presence in the field.   Total staff in Yemen declined from an average of 26 during CAS99 
period to 19 at end CAS02, but the presence of fiduciary staff was strengthened by the 
assignment of an International Procurement Specialist.  In the area of portfolio management, the 
Country Manager in Yemen and other staff are members of a Country Portfolio Performance 
Review (CPPR) follow-up committee involving senior officials from the Ministry of Planning 
and International Cooperation, and the Ministry of Finance.      

A. 4:  Coordination with Development Partners, Harmonization, and Trust Fund 
          Activities 

93. 
Donor support to Yemen stood at around US$200 million during the FY03-05 period and 
IDA resources constituted roughly half of this amount.  Other donors included the Arab Funds, 
European Union, Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the UN system.  The 
relatively small number of donors and the focus of each donor on particular sectors/themes (e.g. 
the water sector dominated both German and Dutch assistance) facilitated a high degree of 
collaboration between donors.  Donor experiences with project implementation in particular 
sectors were largely similar to those reported in the CAS completion report.38  While the IMF did 
not have a PRGF program, it regularly undertook Article IV consultation and was involved with 
providing a substantial program of Technical Assistance which progressively diminished by 
FY2005. 39   

94. 
Harmonization around government strategies focused on education, water and public 
financial management, and accelerated at the country level towards the end of the CAS period in 
the context of the Fragile States Initiative.  The new CAS will benefit from greater 
harmonization efforts as all donors are preparing their strategies at the same time.   

95. 
 Thirteen Trust Fund activities with a total amount of US$125.7 million became effective 
during the CAS period aiming at supporting project preparation, capacity building, and project 
implementation. 

38 This was revealed through donor meetings during the first round of CAS consultations as well as was based on the 
following evaluation reports. 
39  An evaluation conducted by IMF’s Independent Evaluation Office rated the TA as unsatisfactory.  

  
 
 
 
                                                 
- 32 - 

A. 5:  Portfolio Performance and Risk Management 

96. 
Portfolio performance improved over the CAS period.  At end-FY05, Yemen’s 
portfolio (17 projects) was the second largest in MNA, with two major sectors (Water Supply 
and Sanitation, and Education) accounting for 40 percent of the commitments.  Frequency of 
CPPRs and follow-up to CPPR recommendations contributed to manage portfolio risks and 
reduce commitments at risk from an average of 12 percent in CAS99 to 8 percent in FY05.  
More focus on quality at entry and readiness for implementation resulted in a reduction of 
effectiveness delays from 7.6 months before FY00 to 5.3 months during CAS02.  The target in 
2005 CPPR was to reduce effectiveness delays to less than three months.  While Realism index 
remained the same as in previous CAS period (83 percent), Proactivity declined from 72 percent 
to 58 percent due to the long-term problem status of the Civil Service Modernization Project.  
Disbursement ratios were above MNA’s ratios in CAS99 period, but declined from 17 percent in 
FY02 to 15.8 percent in FY05, slightly below MNA’s ratio of 16.3 percent.  It was reported that 
heavy disbursement procedures hinder effective project management. 

97. 
Average Supervision resources increased from US$54,000 in FY03 to US$103,000 in 
FY05, bringing the average resources for CAS02 period to US$77,000 slightly above MNA’s 
average of US$73,000.  The increase in supervision efforts did not result in an improvement 
in supervision quality as IEG ratings for Bank Performance at Supervision show a decline from 
92 percent in CAS99 to 62.5 percent in CAS02.  However, the average six-year trend (FY00-05) 
shows a ratio of 80 percent “Satisfactory”.   

98. Outcomes are Moderately Satisfactory but Sustainability is of concern.  Yemen’s 
percentage of “Moderately Satisfactory” to “Highly Satisfactory” Development Outcomes (75 
percent) of projects that exited during CAS02 period is higher than the overall regional average.  
The FY00-05 trend shows a similar result of 75 percent.  When evaluating the success in 
achieving development outcomes, it is important to note that, with the exception of Public Works 
project with a “Highly Satisfactory” rating, all other projects that exited in CAS02 period were 
rated “Moderately Satisfactory” for Development Outcomes.  More efforts are indeed warranted 
to achieve fully satisfactory results.  Although Monitoring and Evaluation is rated “Satisfactory” 
or “Moderately Satisfactory” in all ISRs, Performance Indicators to track the progress towards 
the achievement of projects’ development objectives (PDO) need more clarity for better 
measurement.  In some cases, where indicators are well defined, they are not used in the PDO’s 
rating explanation.  In other cases, a long list of indicators makes it difficult to track the essential 
intermediate indicators through which the PDO rating should be justified.  Sustainability 
declined from 75 percent in CAS99 to 67 percent in CAS02, bringing the Sustainability level 
below the Bank’s average of 78 percent. 

99. 
Development Impact Risk is high since project implementation arrangements do not 
support Institutional Development objectives.  Despite recommendations emphasizing the 
need to enhance the Institutional Development Impact of the Bank’s interventions in Yemen (e.g. 
highlighted in IEG’s CAE99), the percentage of closed projects with “Substantial” Institutional 
Development Impact declined further from 33 percent at the CAS99 period to 25 percent during 
CAS02.  The institutional development objectives are evaluated from two perspectives:  first, the 
extent to which projects focused on capacity building goals (for Government and public sector 

 
- 33 - 

entities, non-governmental and community-based organizations and the private sector) and 
second, the extent to which project implementation was mainstreamed40.   

Inst Dev 
Impact %
 Substantial

Sustainability % 
Likely

Outcome % 
Satisfacto ry

33%

25%

IEG 
Assessments

CAS99

CAS02

75%

67%

75%

75%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

100. Of the seven projects approved during the CAS period, the three water projects all 
focused on strengthening the role of community organizations (i.e. Water User Associations) and 
the Urban Water Supply project also focused on strengthening the role of corporatized water 
entities.  The Social Fund and the Public Works Projects continued with established procedures 
for community development as part of program delivery.  The Port Cities Development project 
focused on building the capacities of Local Economic Development departments in the cities 
included under the program.  The Basic Education Development Project includes activities to 
support the restructuring of the Ministry of Education and to enhance community participation in 
the education sector. 

101. 
Implementation Arrangements.  Enclave project entities performed two functions in 
Yemen’s context.  First, given weak fiduciary systems in Yemen, some units ensured compliance 
with World Bank procurement and financial management requirements (some units were called 
Credit Administration Units to highlight this role).  Second, given the lack of progress on pay 
reform and performance management initiatives under the Civil Service Reform program, there 
were concerns that mainstreaming activities into relevant Government ministries and agencies 
would lead to slow or limited implementation progress during the project period.  This led to the 
use of Project Implementation Units which made operational decisions and undertook or 
managed implementation41.  The evaluation focused on whether the designed use of the PIU 
model diminished in new projects developed during the CAS period and the conclusion is that to 
a greater or lesser degree all seven projects continued to use this approach.  Two projects (SFD 
III and PWP III) were designed to be implemented by legally enclave entities. The three water 
projects (Urban Water, Sana’a Basin and Groundwater) were designed to be implemented 
through the extensive use of PIUs.  The Education project was mainstreamed to a large extent 
and the Port Cities Development Project was designed to be implemented through the Local 

40 Given weak fiduciary systems in Yemen, it is assumed that there was a continuing need during the CAS period to 
enclave procurement and financial management activities in World Bank projects. 
41 As the PAD for a project put it “ …the reason for this business approach is that the project starts-up rapidly 
…..the PMU will be dissolved at the end of the project”. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
- 34 - 

Economic Development Departments of the concerned cities.  With the exception of only one 
project, all new projects did not include specific future arrangements for integration of the PIUs 
into their line ministries to ensure sustainability and retain the capacity in the government.  

A. 6: Fiduciary and Safeguards: Assessment and Recommendations for the New 
         CAS 

102. Given the high fiduciary risk in Yemen, this CCR highlights the areas of improvement 
and proposes specific recommendations for the new CAS. 

Financial Management 

103. The Financial Management (FM) Project Risk as per the Risk Management tool 
(RapMan) is one of the highest in the region (41 percent).  The main systemic FM issues are 
related to Internal Controls, Staffing, Auditing and Reporting.  The suggestions for the new 
CAS include a comprehensive supervision plan to be prepared to include technical audits for the 
projects on the watch list, and combined ex-post reviews and SOE reviews by the fiduciary team.  
In addition, there is still a need to address country systems’ improvements.    

Procurement 

104. The limited capacity in project implementation was partly linked to the equally limited 
capacity in procurement.  Most projects suffered from: (i) inadequate staffing of the procurement 
function, (ii) lengthy contract processing periods taking longer than bid validity periods, which 
impacted bid prices and confidence of bidders; conflict of interest; and payment delays to 
contractors and consultants.  Recommendations for the new CAS include:     

• Lowering procurement thresholds, conducting joint Procurement and FM ex-post reviews 
of contracts below the prior review thresholds to help ensure consistency; and introducing 
technical/operational audits prior to the mid-term review of all projects. 
• Agreeing with the government on a Memorandum of Understanding that enforces a strict 
adherence to procurement processing schedule and prevents delays in contract 
processing. 
• Enhancing disclosure through more structured public postings of annual procurement 
plans, procurement audit reports, and mid-term review reports.   
• Enhancing procurement post reviews with new techniques on fighting fraud and 
corruption.     

Safeguards 

105. The Bank conducted a safeguards portfolio review, including a field review of risky 
projects conducted over the CAS period, and provided Technical Assistance (TA) to the 
Environmental Protection Authority (EPA).  The TA aimed at (i) reviewing existing laws, 
bylaws, and regulations, (ii) providing assistance in preparing sectoral guidelines, and (iii) 
training EPA staff.  At the project level, the review showed that many category B Project 
Management Units do not identify specific staff responsible for implementation of safeguards 

 
 
 
 
 
 
- 35 - 

mitigation measures.  In addition, Safeguards appear to be a high priority only in project 
preparation, but not during supervision.  Recommendations for the new CAS include: 

• Strengthening national Safeguards compliance through (i) improving line ministries’ 
capacity to comply with national laws; and (ii) direct support to the EPA to enhance its 
capacity to monitor and enforce compliance. 

• 

Increasing supervision focus on Safeguards and enhancing monitoring and reporting on 
Safeguards compliance. 

B. 

Building Capacity in Yemen: The role of World Bank Institute (WBI).   

106. 
 The CAS acknowledged that the most formidable challenge to Yemen’s development is 
weak institutional capacity; and it envisaged a more integrated approach to capacity development 
calling upon the intervention of WBI as a full-fledged partner in support of the realization of 
CAS objectives.  In response, at the launch of the WBI Focus Country initiative in FY03, Yemen 
was one of the countries to be selected as part of the pilot phase.  This allowed the country to 
benefit from customized and strategic support to the government’s capacity building needs 
through the Country Team’s lending and non-lending program.  The first two years under this 
program, WBI took the opportunistic approach of inviting Yemenis to participate in regional and 
global events that pertained to their development challenges. This served as an effective means 
of orienting the participants to WBI’s programs, and allowed the institute to better understand 
capacity issues in the country.   

107. To further enhance the program, WBI consolidated its interventions and adopted a multi-
year country focus program in FY05. The multi-year program for Yemen was closely aligned 
with the FY03-05 CAS focusing on each of the four CAS pillars. The interventions provided 
tailored knowledge sharing focused on decentralization and local government capacity building; 
health sector reform; access to education through the “Education For All” program; Pension 
management; and Water resources management in the context of developing the National Water 
Strategy. Although WBI had planned to deliver a Financial Sector Capacity Enhancement 
Program, the program was canceled due to timing and readiness in the country.  WBI 
complemented these programs with regional/global programs to facilitate exchanges of 
knowledge and strengthening communities of practice.   

108. While modest in size, WBI was able to make a number of achievements through the 
multiyear country focus program. Evidence of the change is marked by a steady increase in 
participation of Yemenis to WBI activities growing from an annual average of 68 participants in 
FY03 to 398 in FY 06.  The Level 1 evaluation results of three activities implemented in FY05 
indicated the programs to be of relevance ranking above the FY04 benchmark of all WBI 
programs.  The results also indicated that the activities’ average “overall usefulness” to be at 80 
percent, meeting the exact benchmark set for WBI FY 05 programs.   

109. Amongst the country focus multi-year interventions, deliveries include:  

• “National Water Sector Strategy and Investment Plan (NWSSIP) workshop” as 
part of the MNA Region’s programmatic ESW assistance.  The workshop met its 

 
- 36 - 

objective of presenting the final policy matrix for the national plan to key 
stakeholders and providing a forum for discussion and development of a monitoring 
and evaluation program for the water strategy plan.  The workshop held discussions 
on the advisability and feasibility of establishing a Groundwater Task Force to 
oversee the rapidly diminishing groundwater resources of the country.  A series of 
facilitated working groups addressed the various key issues and provided a 
framework for the establishment of a practical monitoring and evaluation program.   
• Education program on Strengthening EFA Implementation which was delivered 
through a series of 6 video conference events with the main objective of helping the 
participants gain an understanding of the Fast Track Initiative (FTI) in terms of how it 
operates, and changes it has faced since its inception in 2002.  The program, delivered 
in Arabic, also introduced participants to best practices from other countries.  
• The Senior Policy Seminar on Analyzing Health Sector Performance was 
prepared in close collaboration with the Ministry of Health and the American 
University of Beirut.  The main objective was to support the MOH in thinking 
through the formulation of its next 5-year plan and assist in prioritizing interventions.  
High level government officials from various ministries and several donors attended 
the seminar.  The donors showed interest in the possibility of implementing the 
different Flagship modules and customize them for Yemen.   
• Decentralization and Improving Governance:  WBI conducted needs assessment 
of training needs for local government in FY05. It will continue to assist the Ministry 
of Local Administration on the development and implementation of its national 
training program for building capacity of local administrations in FY06, in close 
alignment with the Taiz Municipal Development and Flood Protection Project.   

C.  

International Finance Corporation (IFC) 

110. 
IFC’s portfolio during the CAS period included three operations but none of them was 
approved during the CAS period: Radfan ceramics and porcelain manufacturing (FY 98), Aden 
Company for Silos and Mills (FY 99), and Al-Ahlia Mineral Water Company (FY02).  All 
investments have contributed to employment generation and poverty reduction, in line with the 
objectives of the 2002 Yemen CAS.  The bottled mineral water produced by Al-Ahlia supplies 
several cities in Yemen, including the capital city Sana'a, as a quality import substitution 
product, and the operation contributed to creating 100 jobs.   

D.  Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)  

111. 
MIGA has had no activities in Yemen and none were under preparation during the 
CAS period.   

- 37 - 

VI.  LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SUBSEQUENT 
 CAS DESIGN 

112. Yemen is considered to be a Fragile State i.e. it is among a group of countries where: (a) 
state policies and institutions are weak making them vulnerable in their capacity to deliver 
services to citizens, control corruption or provide for sufficient voice and accountability; and (b) 
there are risks of conflict and political instability.  Yemen is in the initial group of pilot countries 
where the OECD Principles for Good International Engagement in Fragile States are being 
implemented and an Aid Harmonization Assistance unit in the Ministry of Planning and 
International Cooperation is leading this effort.   There are twelve principles that can be clustered 
into four themes.  First, a long-term focus on state capacity and accountability is critical.  
Second, political, security and development linkages are particularly important.  Third, 
particularly close partnerships between international actors are needed to ensure delivery of 
results. Fourth donor organizational responses must be calibrated to the specific needs of fragile 
states particularly with regard to acting faster and more flexibly, staying engaged for the long-
term and addressing problems of aid orphans and aid volatility.  Within the typology of Fragile 
States, Yemen exhibits most of the characteristics of a gradual reformer.  42  A recent Bank-wide 
review of progress in the implementation of CASs in Fragile States drew several lessons which 
are similar to those identified under this Completion Report.    

113. CAS Results Selectivity: Striking the correct balance.  Given that donor assistance to 
Yemen is extremely limited, donor projects need to balance competing goals of delivering 
immediate results (essential to build confidence in public service delivery in a Fragile State) and 
improving the long-term delivery capacity of Government’s systems.  The Bank will need to 
continue balancing two competing priorities:   

• Deploying its instruments to achieve the best balance between improving country 
systems (and thereby leveraging Yemen’s own substantial resources) and, given 
pervasive capacity and governance weaknesses, focusing on delivering more 
immediate results through its own interventions; 

• Deploying its instruments to assist the Government in dealing with a shorter-term 
growth (and fiscal crisis) and with long-term development challenges (improving 
human capital and managing scarce water resources).43    

114. 
It is noteworthy that in supporting the Government in improving country systems and in 
addressing the shorter-term crisis, the Bank program primarily consisted of non-lending 

42 The World Bank typically considers countries as Fragile States if the CPIA is below 3.0 and marginal Fragile 
States if the CPIA is below 3.2.  Yemen’s CPIA rating is slightly above the marginal level.  The typology of Fragile 
States consists of countries in deterioration; prolonged crisis or impasses; post-conflict or political transition; and in 
gradual improvement.  See Fragile States – Good Practice in Country Assistance Strategies, The World Bank, 2005. 
43 The growth crisis (rapid depletion of oil resources) was to be addressed through enhancing non-oil growth through 
improving productivity via short-term measures (improving the environment for private investment) and long-term 
measures (improving human capital) and translating any given level of growth into higher per capita growth by 
controlling  population growth (an increase of 500,000 persons per year).   The associated fiscal crisis was to be 
dealt with through increased fiscal revenues from non-oil sources and decreased expenditures (both subsidy 
reduction and wage bill management). 

 
                                                 
- 38 - 

services44.   The Bank’s lending program was focused on delivering more immediate results and 
in addressing the long-term development challenges of improving human capital and managing 
scarce water resources45.  The new CAS would need to consider whether country system 
improvements and addressing the short-term growth crisis requires lending assistance.  
This could consist of making investments in productive sectors in urban and rural areas 
(particularly for the poorer part of the population) and policy based lending to support 
fiscal reform. 

115. Developing Long-term partnerships: Working within the context of a Government 
led program with other donors.  Bank programs that have experienced some success in Yemen 
have been supported through an appropriate sequencing starting with assisting the Government 
in formulating a sector strategy and financing plan; working with other donors to ensure that the 
plan is adequately funded; and providing IDA loans in the context of this financing plan.  This 
takes much longer than going directly to providing financing but attempts to deviate from this 
sequencing have been less than satisfactory.  The education sector is a good example of where 
this sequence has worked although it has taken about five years to get from the broad vision to 
successful implementation.  The Public Financial Management (PFM) thematic area is another 
good example; where a PFM Plan was approved by the Cabinet, endorsed and funded by key 
partners and where the Bank’s CSMP will help to implement a key part of the plan.  The water 
sector is moving along a similar path with the NWSSIP, the CWRAS and intensive discussions 
among donors to move to a coordinated financing plan and implementation approach.    

116. Strengthening State Capacity and Accountability.  In a Fragile State environment, the 
Bank’s approach to mainstreaming its activities into Government ministries is an extremely 
contentious issue particularly given the Bank’s international commitments to move away from 
PIUs. On the one hand, experience clearly showed that in Yemen, it was only enclave institutions 
that consistently delivered outputs (the Social Fund and the Public Works Program) and to a 
lesser degree of consistency, PMUs delivered outputs.   On the other hand, the Bank reacted to 
criticism from OED and other in-country donors that it was not “building capacity” and 
attempted in its newer projects to move to lighter coordination structures and transfer more 
implementation responsibilities to the line ministries.   However, in the absence of clear 
incentives 
for service delivery 
(both 
low pay and 
the absence of performance 
measurement/incentive systems), projects that attempted to “mainstream” ran into problems.  For 
example, the Health Reform Support Project chose a lighter project coordination structure (an 
IDA Credit Administration Unit) and attempted to implement activities through relevant 
departments.  However, civil servants who normally work only half the day, were expected to 
stop moonlighting and focus on credit implementation for the entire day could not be motivated, 
according to the Bank’s rules, through additional payments to keep them on the job.   The 
lessons for the new CAS are that actions to move away from PMUs and mainstream 
implementation need to be considered on a sector-by-sector basis taking into account the pace of 
actions to strengthen fiduciary systems (procurement and financial management) and 
implementation capacity (progress in sector level civil service restructuring).  An alternative 

44 The Port Cities Development project and the Civil Service Modernization project  (the latter being a large 
Technical Assistance project) were the only lending activities supporting the growth/fiscal agenda. 
45  Infrastructure investments (rural roads and power) were undertaken more in support of long-term challenges 
rather than as an integral part of the growth strategy of the CAS.  Similarly, the focus on secondary education was 
not based on its impact on population control but as part of the long-term human development. 

                                                 
- 39 - 

approach is to formalize and provide greater autonomy to enclave entities (e.g. the Social Fund 
for Development and the Public Works Project) bearing in mind the need to ensure sustainability 
of results. 

117. Greater Readiness and Implementation Focus: non-lending products.  In the 
preparation of the CASCR (and in the IEG completion of the CAE and during the CAS 
consultations in November 2005), it was noted that several pieces of Economic and Sector Work 
had been initiated, reached a stage where the work was discussed with the Government 
counterparts but the reports were never publicly disseminated46.   Four problems were identified:  
inadequate management of analytical and advisory services by the Bank which led to 
fragmentation and lack of publication of several reports; recommendations made by the Bank 
were not systematically implemented (either due to disagreements at technocratic or policy levels 
or due to non-approval by the legislature); there was no process of periodically reviewing 
progress in implementing policy recommendations before making new ones; and the Bank did 
not effectively leveraged its Economic and Sector Work to influence key stakeholders outside 
the Government through wide spread dissemination.  The lessons for the new CAS are: to 
ensure a clear process of managing the portfolio of AAA (in a manner similar to lending 
with a country level oversight process similar to the CPPR); and to better utilize the 
institutional infrastructure (the Public Information Centers (PICs) and the Development 
Information Network), focus on disseminating individual reports and on the re-packaging 
of key messages of reports into “popular versions” which can be more readily disseminated 
to the population at large. 

118. 
 Greater Readiness and Implementation Focus: Lending program.  Most of the new 
projects prepared during the CAS period suffered from over-optimism about their readiness to be 
implemented: this related in part to under-designed projects (e.g. the Health Reform Support 
project); complex projects (e.g. the Child Development Project which attempted to coordinate 
education, health and water activities within the same project); or projects that had been suitably 
designed but where necessary implementation pre-requisites (e.g. procurement bid packages) 
were not adequately addressed.  The lessons for the new CAS are to ensure a more systematic 
application of available “readiness filters” particularly with regard to ensuring that 
procurement packages are ready for issuance prior to project negotiations and Board 
presentation.    

119. Monitoring and Evaluation for Development Effectiveness.  The CAS did not have a 
Sound Results Framework that could be monitored to take timely corrective actions and ensure 
results on the ground.  In addition to designing a Results Framework, the new CAS should 
explicitly set the mechanisms for Monitoring the framework, the responsibilities for reporting on 
progress towards achievements of CAS outcomes, and the use of evaluation information for 
decision-making.       

46 The Bank’s external website leads users to less than 5 reports on Yemen for the CAS period. 

                                                 
-

0
4

-

A

p
p

e

d
n

i

x

1

.

A
C

S

2
0

R

e

s

u

l

t

s

C

h

a

i

n

  S

c
e

o

d
n
S

F

i

v

c
e
e

Y

r
e
e

a
v

P

l

a

n

a

d
n

P

R

P

O

b

j

t

i

s

    C
       C

A

S
S

t

r

a

t

e

g

i

c

P

l
l
i

a

r

s

A

S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

…

w

h

i
l
i
t
i

e

a
a
e
c
e
a

n
d
b
n
p
d
h
n
n
n
n
o

a

c

i

g
n

t

h

e

e

o
u
o
v
n
p
u
n
d
h
h

c
a
c
a
e
e

f

i
t
t

a

l

c
e
a

t
i

g
n
o
y
y
u
d

f

r

r

c

i

i

r

l

r

a

t
i
l
i

P

l
l
i

b
n
o
n
a

a
r
e

I
I

i
:
l

S

t

r

e

g
n
u
b
g
n
n

t
i

h
n

e
e

n

i

g
n

t

v
n
h

e

s

s
s

e

i

r

m

e

t

I

m

e
y
s
y
c
n
n
a
a
a
a
c
v
b
u
r
a
n
d
e
r
t
o
i
n
e
s
f
f
c
u
l
r
d
i
e
o
e
v
e
1
p
c
h
g
c
c
n
c
n
d
a
a
n
a
o
s
b
a
h
o
v
a
n
a
n
e
e
2
y
r
n
e
e
v
t
n
c
s
e
e
e
d
I
a
d
n
y
s
(
e
d
n
a
n
n
S
a
l
g
n
a
e
s
a
r
a
n
d
n
e
v
i
c
d
a
o
r
)
f
v
c
a
o
t
o
e
e
.
o
c
d
l
o
p
v
c
g
d
d
n
e
g
n
n
n
k
n
a
b
u
o
 S
e
a
J
e
s

r
r
t
i
t

i
r
l

m

t
r

f

i

t

(

l

m

m

m

r
t
i
l
i
l
i
r
t

f
i
(

i

)
l
t
l

m

t
.
I
t
(

l

l

)

i
r
l
l
i
i
f

m
m

t
r

s
y
e
d
r
b
a
e
e
v
d
e
e
a
d
c
h
e
e
c

i
l
l
t
r

i

l

l
r
i

t

o

i
)

t

s

.

 B

e
u
n
n
e
e
v
e
e
g
e
a
n
e
a

t
t

r

r

d
n
3
a

d
n
e
p
x
e

t
i

u

r

e

m

m

t

I
(

.

)

I

n
a
o
1
a
s
.
d
i
I
n
n
s
I
a
I
a
o
h
(
s
n
p
s
a
e
e
c
u
c
e
c
d
o
h
a
e
d
o
e
d
s
n
y
a
a
s
e
s
e
c
a
v
n
u
e
q
g

,
t
i
l
l
r

t

i
t

t

l
l

l

w
w

t
i

m
m

l
r
i

)

 I

m

s
d
e
c
n
a
v
e
e
g
s
a
h
e
v
a
o
e
c
h
d
e
o
v
y
o
2
p
a
u
q

)
t
r
i
l
.
I
I
I
(

r
t
l

f

r

i

 C

o
o
c
p
n
u
p
o
u
s
a
c
a
e
u
r
r
o
u
d
y
s
a
e
c
c
e
n
h
e
u
n
c
g
S
r
u
r
e
r
n
h
y
e
r
s
s
d
a
a
d
s
e
r
e
n
o
r
a
s
a
f
o
e
h
e
r
n
e
a
h
h
S
S

t
t

l

O

t

m

s
o
e

:

I

t

r

t

t

t
t
l

&

i
t

f

N
m
m

t
t
i

C
G
C
R

D

e
v
e

l

p
o

m

n
e

t

l
i

t

K
R

i

k
o
s
n

&

w

l

e
g
d
e

i

P

i
l
l
l
i

o
a
n
b
o
u
p

r
c

1

:

I
r

m

p

r

h
h
g
u
g
o
n
n
h
n
v
o

i
t

t

e

d

e

i
l

g
v
n
o

e
e

r
r

o
y

f

s

c
e

v
o
g
v

i

e
e
c

s

r

s

t

r

c
e

m

i

r

a

e
c

P

l
t
l
i
l
i

d
a

r

I
I
I

:

B

u
o
u
o
p

i
t
i

u
d
n
g
g
n
n

a

r

c
e

H

m

a

n

R

e

s

r

e
c

s

A

c
c
e

v
h
o
n
h
o
o

i

e

i
i

g
n

m

c

g

r

w

t

B

n
e
a
y
d
u
u
n
e
c
h
s
g
e
g
a
u
e
b
e
s
1
i
,
t
v
a
r
r
e
.
d
c
I
n
c
I
s
e
y
u
s
s
n
(
c
r
e
a
t
o
n
)
e
n
e
n
s
s
a
a
c
p
d
h
a
s
o
a
e
u
n
o
n
o
b
e
p

r
r
t
i
t

i

t
i
i
t
t
i
,
r
,
s
l
t
i
t
l
i

m

s
n
s
e
e
e
c
u
c
c
a
n
e
o
d
s
d
e
r
e
e
i
e
o
a
v
v
v
r
a
p
o
o
n
o
c
r
e
i
,
p
r
p
s
e
c
y
y
y
h
a
o
p

i
r
l

m

t

t

h

r

h
g
u
o

m

t

m

r

m

,
t

,

m
m

r

r

t
r

t

t
i
r

i
r
f
f

l

r
)

(

w

t

w

e

r

&

 R

i
.
I
t
s
I
e
f
(
o
i
r
t
i
o
e
v
t
l
o
i
c
t
e
r
c
s
a
e
h
a
a
c
g
c
n
n
e
a
c
n
u
d
e
e
o
h
c

r
i

l
l
t
i
i

s
c
e
n
2
h

t
l
)

n
g
n
e
d
a
u

i
t

i

m
m

t

i
f

I

m
w

d
a
s
n
s
e
v
e
h
o
v
a
g
o
u
e
u
s
e
p
o
p
a
e
a
h
e
d

r
r
t
r

e
e
c
a
o
a
p
d
n
n
e
n
o
n
o
y
e
h
a
d
g
1
g
n
b
n
o
a
e
c

i
t
t
i
i
t
l
i

s

l
f

r

l
r
i
t

i

,

t

w

t

r

l

r
i
t

V
m

i
.
t
i
I
(

i
t
)

m

  E

i
f
f

n
o
s
e
e
c
a
u
p
s
s
e
o
I
n
a
n
d
s
(
o
o
i
e
a
i
t
e
r
c
g
t
s
c
a
n
d
a
a
g
a
n
a
d
p
u
g
a
n
n
a
a
a
i
n
s
u
)
n
s
n
e
r
e
e
o
e
r
e
u
l
i
i
h
o
t
r
c
s
t
r
e
u
a
o
t
h
e
e
s
o
p
o
p

i

t

m

i
r
i
t
i

m

l
r
l

i
t

f

t

l

i
(
f

m

.
t
t

l
l

l

V

2

)

P

t
t
l
l
i

a

r
c
a
e

I

V

:

S

u
o
o
u
p

s

i
i
t
i

g
g
n
n
n

a
a

u
d
n

r

N

t

r

a

l

R

e

s

r

e
c

s

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

1
4

-

A

p
p

e

d
n

i

2
x

.

A
C

S

C

o

m

p

l

e

t

i

o

n

M

a

t

r

i

x

2
0
0
2

A
C

S

S

t

a

t

u

s

a

t

C

o

m

p

l

e

t

i

o

n

(

F

Y

5
0

)

L

e

s
s
s

o

n
d

s

L

e

v
n
d
o
d
d
p
d
o
v
d
y
d
d
d
x
d
n
n
g
n
d
b
o
g
o
n
u
g
u
h
n
o
o
n
o
g
n
o
o
h
n
n
a
v
y
v
o
g
u
u
u
h
n
n
u
v
o
p
o
d
p
n
o
n
a
d
h
h
p
n
g
n
a
h
d
v
o
o
h
g

r

n
n

e

d

d
n
n

C

o

n

i
i

e
e
e
c
a
a
e
c
r
e

t

i

s
s

f

e
a
a
a
e
e
e
r
c
a

A
w
C
w

S

C

y
n
u
u
o
o
d
p
h
o
u
u
p
b
g
y
h
o
n
g
g
n
4
o
u
o
h
o
o
•

n
u

t

r

D

e

v

a
e
e
a
e

l
t

o
o
g
h
o
g
o
p
y
n
g
n
p
o
u
g
d
n
o

p

m

e

n

t

G

a
x
g
o
n
n

l
t
t

s

T

e

a
a

l
i

s

i
l

s

i

t

e

e

c

l
l
l

m

m

a
e
c

t

s

r

i
t

h

e

f

w
H

i
i

l
l
l

e

s

:

i
t
t
i

r

w

t

h
h
p

i
,

p
d

a

r
r
r
r
r

i
i
t
t
t
t
t
t
i

c

i
t
l

a

r

l

s

e
a
a
e
c
a

r
r
f

a

c

i

s

w

m

w

e
e
e
c
e
e
a
a
a
e
a
a
e
a

e
a
a
e
a
a
e
c
e
e

s
s

r

s

.

•

W

r

c

t
i

n
v
y

o
h
o
p
d
p
n
d
n

r

w

s

t

r

t

m

i
,
t

a

t

e

r

l

o
g
u
n
d
y
p
v
n
u
o
u
u
u
n
o
o
y
n
p
h
g
u
g
n
d
o
d
n
u
k
d
u
b
k
u
d
q
n
o
k
n
u
p
p
n
p
o
d
d
o

g

i
t

e

m

c
a

t

n
o

g

r

t
l

r

.

•

W

m

d
u
o
h
d
y
n
o
o
n
v
k
v
o
o
k
o
p
o
d
d
n
g
n
o
n
n
n
h
o
n
p
d
o
h
n
v
n
n
o
o

r

e

s

r

e
c
a
e

s

,

i
l

w

l
t
,
t
i

r

t
l

h

a
a
c
e
a
a
c
e
a
c

i
t
i
i
t
,
i
t
i
l
i
t
i
t
t
i

s
s

c
a
c
a
a
a
c

f
r

a

s

a

d
n

a
e
e

i
t
l

a

l

t

r

i

i

f

a

s

a
e
e
a

r

s

f

r

w

o
d
n
y
o

m

e

n

.

•

W

a
e

r

n

a
a
c

a
e
e
c
c
a

t
i
t

n

s

i
t
i
l
t
i
t
t
,
i
t
t
l
l
i

i
l

t
i

f
f
f

t
i

g
h
n

e

s

e
a
e
c
c
e
a
a

c

l
t

r

s

t

e
a
e
a
a

,

d
h
u
b

a

a
a
e

w
w

g

r
r
r

t
i
t

,

k

j

i

s

s

e

m

l
i
.
i

•
•

F

a

s

d
h
g
k

l

e
a
c

i
t
l

r

e
a

s

e

r

y
v

e

s

.

H

i
i

f

i

s

s

s

t

a

n

b

t
i
l
i

r

s

.

G

a
o

l

s

:

•
•
•
•

A
D

c
e

o
n
o
u
h
n
o
g
g
g
n
n
n
g
p
v
n
v
o
o
u
h
v
p
n

i

e
e

i

c
e

m
m

i

c
e
e
c
c

u
o
o
g
u

r

w

t

h

l

i

a

u
o
n

r

s

r

e
c

s

I

m

r
r

i

i

r
f

a
a

s

t

r
r

t

r

e

E

s

i

s

c

i

l

p

t

i
t

n
o

L

i

m

t
i

e

p
1
v
d
o
0
4

r
r

n
g
y
o

r

c
e

s
s

w

e
c
a
e

s

m

a

d
o

e

.

•

P

e

t

i

i

d

n

:

r
f

m

6
1
4

.

t

o

.

•

R

a
e

l

D
G

P

g
n

r
(

o
o
o
p
o
p
o
n
g
p
3
n
o
o
o

w

t

p
h
p

e
e

r

a

u
n
n
o

m

:

n
n
n
4
p
p
b
u
n
p
5
p
4
8
b
8
o
u
o
2
u
3
o
p
p
2
o
p
u
6
3

.

e

r

e
c
e
e
c

t

c

m

a

r

d

t

a

t

a

r

g

e

t

f

.

p

r

t

)
r

•

P

l

a
e
e
c
c
a
e
e

t
i
t
t
t

w

t

p
4
h
6
n
h

t
t
:
i

r
f

o

m

3

.

5

r
r

e

r

e
c

•

r
f

.

w

e
e
c
c
c
e
a

s
s

t
t

o
o

r

w

e
e
a
c

t

:
t

r
f

m

r

n

t

.

e
e
c
a
e

r

p
o
o
p
n
o

•

r
r

t
t

r
f

.

w

t
i

p
h
5
5

e
e
c
c
c
e
a

s
s

t
t
t

o
o

r

l

w

e
e
c
a
e
e

t
:

r
f

m

r

n

.

r
r

b
n
o

•

N

m

f
f

e
e

0
1
6
0
0
d
6
n
o
n

e
a

f

i

a
a
c

i

r

i
i

e

s
s

n
o

f

s

c

i

a

l

w

e

l

a

r

s
s

t
.

a

e
c

:

r
f

m

0
6
1
0
5
4

t

•

L

m

t
i

r

r

s

a
e
e
e

k
v

e
e

r

m

t
i

e

n

m

r

l
l

i
l

t

r

s
s

t

e

i

a
c
a

i
t

r

w

l
l
t
i
t

h
d

.

•

O
Y

l
i

e
a
e
e
e
a
e
e
e
e

e

e

a

r

a

a

e

e
c

m

’

s

s
s

t
i

i
t
l

a
a
e

w

i

o
h
n
h

r
r

s
s

l
i
t
i

e
e

r

t
i
l
i

y

e
c
e
a

e
e
e

n

m

o

r

e

s

i
l

.

T

o
g
n
n
n
n
n
o
o
v
o
o
v
n
u
n
o
o
n
v
p
n
g
n
u
p
n
o
v
h
d
v
o
h
o
h
o
n
x
d
g

w

C

A

S

s

l

r

s
s

t
i

-

i
t
t
l
t
i
i

g
h

r

o

w

t

a

t
i
,

s

m

c
a

t

c
e
a
e
c

m

a

d
n

c

i
t

a
c
e

s

l
l
.

f

r

e

r

t

i

e
e

r

s
s

i
l

f

i

o
d
b
n
n
o
o
d

•

T

o

w

w

f

c
e
e

o
n
o

m

i

c

r

e

f

r
r

m
m

s

e
a

f
f

c
e

t

e
a
a
a
e
e

t
i
l
t
i
.
t
l

y
h

e
e
e

t

’

s

t

o

c
a

i

e

t
i

s

s

•

T

e

r

m

n

p

e

r

e
c

i
i
i

v

e

s
s
s

c
a

r
r

i
t

a

s

s

e

r

j
i
i
i
t
t
i

n
u
o
o

s

h
u
g
n

e
e

i

s

a
c
c
a

s

i

g
y
n
d
n
u
u
d
n
y
o
d
n
u
h
n
o
p
n
p
o
n
n
v
o
g

r

i

i

t

E
T

t

r

i
t

e
e

I

s

r

e
a
c

s

r

e
a
a
e
a

n

s

p

r

c

I

i
t

d
d
d
v
n
o
o

e

.

T

h
h

e

n

w

C

A

S

s

t
l
i

s

i

e
e

r
r

t

i

s

s

r

t
.

t

a

s
s

r

a

e
c

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

2
4

-

2
0
0
2

A
C

S

S

t

a

t

u

s

a

t

C

o

m

p

l

e

t

i

o

n

(

F

Y

5
0

)

L

e

s
s
s

o

n
d
S
n

s

L

e

g
o
u
n
n
o
q
p
g
o
d
x
n
o
n
d
v
v
g
o
o
o
n
a
p
p
d
u
o
n
o
o
p
n
p
b
g
o
p
v
p
n
d
n
o
h
g
d
p
n
g
h
n
n
h
o
g
o
n
n
g
o
p
n
a
g
h
n
n
n
n
n
d
d
o
h
u
n
u
h
d
k
n
q
d
n
u
n
n
h
o
n
h
u
o
b
d

r

n
n

e

d

d
n
n

C

o

i

e
r
e
c
e
e
c

a

t

i

s

r
f

r

e
a

A
C
w

S

A
C

S

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

 (

G

i

v

e

n
h
h
d
n

t

h

o
a
a
a
o
v
a

t

t

u
h

e

a
a
2
0
0
2

w
A
C

d
k
d
S

i

n

o

t
t

r
r
e
r
e
e
e

e
r

s

l

t

s

f

r
e

m

e

o

r

w

i

c
c
e

l

b
d
d
n
h
u
S
b
n
u
h

t

c
e

o

m

s

d
n

i

i

a

t
t

s

,

t
t

R
C
C

a

t
t
f
t

m
m

p

k
d

o
o

l
i

a
a

e
r

s
s
s
s

u

l

t
t
f

s

r
e

a
x

e

w

o

t

e

i

o

h

e

t

1
x
o

f

)
t

h

A
C

a

i

t

A

n
n

e

.

•

P

l
l
i

a

c
r

1

.

I
s

m

p

d
r
e
n
h
e
v
n
o
n
e
o
u
r
d
c
o
o
p
h
n
v
d
d
k
n
n
u
n

v
o

i

n
h
n

o
g
a

t

h
u
n

e

d
h

r
e

i
l

v
o

r
e
r
e

o
y
g

f

o
n
b
u
p

i
l

r
c
e

v
o
v
g

i

s

t

r

g

s

t

n

c
e

o

o

m

I
i

s
e
s
e
v
e
c
e
c
v
o
o
c
c
g
g
s
a
u
c
a
n
a
s
d
d
e
e
o
n
e
s
s
e
o
o
e
b
e
c
y
e
a
d
s
n
e
c
n
e
e
s
d
a
y
e
s
e
n
b
n
v
n
g
s
u
s
n
d
e

m

r
r
i

e
e
c
e

f
i
r
l
i
f
f

c
c
e
a
a
a

m

t

c
c

i

l
l
r
i
l
r
l
i
i

e
s

r

v

a

n

t

s

e

a
a
a
e
c
a
d
c
a
e
n
e
c
e
e
e
p
r
x

e
a
a
c
e
e
a
c

n
y

t

t
l
i
l
r
i
t

m

e
e
e
s
e

n

.
t

t

i
r
l
l
i
i
t
f

a

a

i
l
l
t
r
l

v

l

s

o

S

d

m
m

t
r

e

d

y
d
b

a
e
J
e
s

t
l
i
r
i
r
r

S

e
s
e
s

r
t

d
h

e
a
e

t

o

v

i

e
c

v

r

t

.

o

B

t
t

u
n

a
a
a
e

d
g
n
n

e

r

m

e
e

m

e

n

.
t

•

P

l
l
i

a
a

r

g
2

.

u
b
S
B

t

n
n

g

t

h

n
n
n

i

g
v

t

n
h

e

n

n
o
b

i
l

s
e

r
i

v
d
e
n
y
h
v
n
g
o
o
d
u
u
n
o
u
o
u
h
d
p
v
y
g
n
n
h
o
p
p

i

r
n

o

m

e
e
a

n

t

e

t
t
r

i

i
r
t

m

t
t

t
i
i
l
l
r
i

m

t
l
,

t
i

h

m

n
u
h
n
n
o

b

u
y
d
p
g

m

,
;
l
i
t
,
i
r
r
r
t
i

e

h
u
g
u
u
o
d
h
v
d
o
u
o
d
n
h
b
n
o
p
n

a

t

o

r

y

c
e
e
s

m
m
m

e

,
r
t

r

r
t
r

v
o
p
o
o
p

e

t
r

y

i
i
r
f

a
e
c
c
c
s
e
s
a

r

a

t
r
f

l
r
.
r
t
)
i
r
l
f

i
r

m

e
e

d

i
r
i

t
r
t
r
i

s
s
a
a
e
e
a
c

c

t

e

(

w

a

t

r

,

w
R

&

o

c
c
e

g
n

o

v
c
o
n
r
e
a
c
a

l
t
i
t
i
i
f

h

c
e
t
e
s
s
c
e
e
a

s

t

a

t

e

i
i

n
n

m
m

e

i

i
t

l
i
l

i
i

g
n

h

n

t

o

r

.

•

P

l
l
i

3
a
a

r

.

B

u

n
d
u

a
g

d
n

P

o

t

i

n

g

H

u

m

n
o

R

s
s
e
e
c
s
s
e
a
e
a
e
e
c
a
s
e
s
a
s
s
e
g
v
c
a
u
c
n
o
s
a
a
o
h
o
e
c
d
n
d
s
o
e
o
e
r
s
s
v
a
y
a
o
a
h
e
c
p
s
p
o
c
u
e
u
n
d
q

o

I

r

o
d
n
d
d
d
v
o
n
n
v
o
g
u
h

u
q

a

t
i
t
l
i

y
h

t

o

e
e

i
t

t

l
l
r
r
l
i
t
l
l
l
r
f

l

s

,

w
w

m
m

i

m

e

n

.

o

I

t
r
i
l

e
a
e
a
a
e
c

a

s
s
a

t
f

r

i

.
:

o

C

r

c
e
s

r

N
R
O

t

m

(cid:131)

R

l
t

(cid:131)

S

a

n
p
u
o
y

t
t
i

(cid:131)

C
D

v
o

m
m

n
y

e

e

l

m

e

t

P

l
l
i

a

r

1
u
n

.

U

n

s

a
o
d
y

t
f
r

i

s

f

d
a
v
h
n
v
n
d
d
v
d
y
k
g
o

c

t

o

c
a
c
r
c
e
e
e

d
g
n
d
p
n
d
u
n
n
v
o
y
u

•

N

m

b

e
e
a
e
a
a
e
a
c
a
e

r

e
e
c
a
e
a
c
e
e
e
e
e
e
z
e
a
c
a
a
e
e

i
t

l
i

s

r

a

t

s

i

r

s

r

t

h
d
d

c
e
e

i
l

d
d
d
h
n

e
e
e

.

•

R

l

p

l

l

s

i
l

r

a
e

t

r

t

d
n
n
d
o
o
v
n
n
v
a
o
d
d
p
g
y
o
d
g
8
n
n
p
n
2
d
g
p
u
8
n
v
g
n
n
d
v
1
v
n
g
d
b
2
o
n
v
o
o
h
n
p
u
n
u
o
n
p
o
a

r

i

s

m

r

s
s

.

•

C

t
i

l
i

s

r
r

i

r

e

s

t

r

t

r

i

i

r

s
s

.

•

S

e
e
c

r

i

i
.
l

y
o
o
v

e

r

r

e
e
c
e

m

a
a

i
i
i
i
i

y
g
d
n
n
n
g
d
n
u
h

e

t

r
r
r

i
l
l
t
l

S

m

j
t

r

f

r

l
t
.
i

h

c
e

a

r

u
b

t

s

s

t

e
a
c
e
e
e
e
c
a
c
e
e
a
e
a

m

c

a

s

w

e

r

e

t

r

t
t

k

n

•

A

r

e
a

f

i
i

s

i

i
i

a
a
c
c

.
l
t
t

d
o

r

s

a
a

r

i
t

l
t
l
.
i

h

f
(

s

e

f

i

c

t
i

w

s

r
f

t

i

F

Y

y
b
d
o
4
0

I

i

a
c

r

s

r

s

c

i
i

c
a

l

s

e
e
c
c
a
e
e
e

r

s
s

e

l
i
i
l

t
l

o
o
o
y
n
p
n
g
o
n
n
p
o

r

s

t

h

e

s

t

a

i
t

a

e

e
a
c
e

s

r

j

t

.

P

l
l
i

r

.

U

n

s

n
v
a
n

t

s
s

f

t

r

•

P

r
f

i

a

t

e
e
e

i

e
a
e
c
c

t
t
l

m

t

t
t

D
G

P

r

a

i
t

o

r
r

w

s

m
m

e

.
l
t

•

C

m
m

i

l

-
r

t

e
e
c

r

e
a

g
o
n
n
d
n

i

r

i

s

.
t
l
i

y
b

0
5

e

n

t

w

s

t

m

e

•

I

n
h
p

r
f

a
a
e
c
e
e
c
a
e
a
c
e
c
e
e
a
e
e
e

i
t

n
b
x
o
u
n
n
o
v
h
h
u
n
o
p

t

a
e

r
f
r
r

g

e
a
e
a

t

s

(

o

f

b
h

e
e
e
e
e
e
a
c

l

d
d
o
n
v
n
h

w

0
u
1
b
n
g

t
t

)

w

p
o
2
n
u
o
1
v
o
g
n
g
g
o
n
o
n
p
g
o
p
h
d
n
g
n
u
n
o
b
o
h
p
g
n

t

c
e
a

i

t

t

l
l

i

n

l

i
t

f
r

m

i

i

a
e

r

s

e
a
e
e
c
a

e

t

t
.
t

a

r

t

r
r

i

e

r

•

T

w

s

r
r
f

r
r

e
c
e
a

s
s

i

n
u

c
a

t
i
i
i
t
t
t
t

v
o

i

i

a

s

l
t
i

t
t

r

e
c
e
e

m

e
a
e

s

t

r

s

t

o
p
o

r

c
a
e

r

i

p

i
t

a

s

f

o

r

t

h

w

e

r

s

o

r

w

r
r

e

t

m

e

t
.
t

•

L

i

m

e

d

r

e
e

s
s

i

n

h
g

e
e

f
f

i

n
o

a
a

n

c

i

a

l

s

c
e

o

r

w

t
i

t

p

a

s
s

a

•

s
s

f

r
r
r

m

s

h

a
e

s

b

e
e

n

i
l

w

t
i
i

a
a

r

i

a

t
i
t

s
s
s

e
a

c

s

t

i
t

w

h
n

i

s

l
i
i
t

t
i
t

a
e

G

e
c
a
e

r
r

m

a
e

i
t
t

i

y
n
g
g
n
y
u
k
o
n

f

r

m

c
e
a
a

s

t

s

t

r
r

e

a

f

i

l

;
t

w

w

t
t
i

t

r

r

s

a
e

s

r

e

t

a

t

e

l

a

i

s

a

e

t

e

l

f

e

;

a

r

i

i
t

I

A
D

i
l

a
e
a
a
a
e
e

s

i
i
i

t

e
e
e
c
a
e
e

t

e

f

t

h

i

s

f

e
c
c
e
e
e

l

.

•

T

r

s

a
c

f

o
n
o
o
d
g
v
n
g
o
d
n
d
d
d
n
v
d
o

r

r

s
s
s

t

o

i
l
l

o
g
y
n
n
b
o
n
v
u
g
p

m
m
m

i
t

e
a

l

g
n
n
n
o
u
v
d
y
o

f

r

i
i
i
t
l

i
t

i

a
c
e

t

e

r
r
r
f

t
l

s

(

s
s

a
c

l

l
i

n
n
v
p
y
o

i

e

e
a
c

i

n

s

e
e
a
e

)
r

i

e
e
e
c
a

i
l

e

i
i

F

r

e
e
e
a
c
e
e
c
e
e
a
e
e
a
e
a
c

l
i
l

e

S

t
t

t

i

m

t

p
p
h
h
h
y

-

r
f

m

i
l

e

r

t
i

G

r

m

e

t

’

s

s

s

t

m

s
s

.

•

T

r

i

n
o
y
d
o
o
n
n
y
g
n
g
n
d
n
v
k
o
o
n
n
d
n
o
n
u
n
o
d
d
o
n
n

e
e

t

c

s

i

d

e

r

w

t

v
o
n
h
o
h
o
u
q
h

r

t
t

r

s

s

t

e
a

m

i
t

m

r

m

s

a

d
d
h

r
r

e
c
a

s
s
s
s

i
.
i

g
n

e
c
e

s

r

t
l
t
t

-

r

m

r

w

t
i

i

r

i
i
t

r

e

s
s
s

i

a
a
e
e
c
a
e
e
a
e

s
s

s

t

o
n

e
c

•

A

m
m

w

y

r
f

m

P

M

U

e
a
e
a
e

a

i

s

t

r

m

i

m

b
h
d
n
u
g
g
u
g
o
n
o
o
n
o
v
p
n
p
o
p

i
l

e

m

t

a

i
t

b
y
b
o
o
d
o
n

t

e

c
e
c
c
e
c
a

s

r

a
e
c
a
c
a
a
a
a

s

t
i

-
r

-

s

t

r

s

i

s

t

i

n
y
n
y
g
o
n

t

t
t

t

h
n

e

d
d
n
n
n
u
o
d
p
n
n

f
r
f

c
a

i
t
i
t

n
o

s

t

o

s

t

r
r

e
e
e
e
e
e
e
c
c
a

f

t
i
t
i
t

i

s

s

a
e
c

m

s

(

p

r

m
m
m

a
e
e

i

a

l

m
m

a

)

i

l

u
n
n

t
t
i

a
c

p

e
c
a
e

l
t
i

y

(

r
r

r

s
s
s

s

c
e
c

t

v
g
n
o
u

r
r

l

c

i

v

l
i

s

e

i

r

e

r

t

i

)

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

3
4

-

2
0
0
2

A
C

S

S

t

a

t

u

s

a

t

C

o

m

p

l

e

t

i

o

n

(

F

Y

5
0

)

L

e

s
s
s

o

n
d

s

L

e

o
a

r

n
n

e

d

d
a
o
o
n

d
n
n

C

o

n

i

e
r
e
e
a
e

a

t

i
i

s

f

r
e
e

e

A
C
w

S

(cid:131)

G

e

d
n

e

r

•

P

l
l
i

a
a

r
r

4
a

.
l

u
S

s
s

t

a
o

i

n
n
u

i

a
g

p
d
n

r

o

t

c
e

t

i

n

g

N

t

o
u

m
R

p
e
v

p
d
n
n
o
d
s
c
y
e
n
n
c
d
o
d
r
e
h
n
v
b
o
g
g
n

I

r
l
i

r
r
i
t
i
t
l
t
i

n
o

s
s
e
e
c
e
a
a
s
a
a
e

f
t

h
n
g
o
u
o
o
p
h

r
r
l

w

a

t

e

r

a
s

a
e

a

t
i
l
i

i

,

r
i
i
i
t
f
r
i
f
t

t
i
t
t

e

e

w

d

e

e

i
t

m

s
a
e
e
s
a
e
a
s
a
s
c
c
a
a
a
a
a

m
m

n
p
o
o
u
n
o
g

.

o

E

i

i
i
t
r
i
i
t
t
f
i
l
l
l
l

m

s
e
e
a
e

u

r

s
e

o
n
n
u
d
g
n
g
n

t
l

u
o
p

e

f

o

t
r
l
t
)

u
d
n
h
o

r
l

t

t
r

s
e
e
c
s

(
i
i
r

e
s
e

m

n
h
o

e
c
a
a

a

i

t

o
p

u

n

p

.

B

a
e
r
a

k
n
o
3
g
n
x

i

5
d
0
d
a
o
0
3
9
n
2
n
0
9
p
o
0
9
n
0
2
1
0
o
n
g
0
2
8
n
2
0
9
u
0
9
9
d
n
2
1
9
9
n
o
p
y
h
1
y
o
2
d
n
n
d
6
d
o
n
n
o
n
g
o
d
n
o
d
n
n
d
o
n
h
g

L

a
e

w

a
a

m

e
e

g
n
d
n

m

e

n

t

a

d
n

.
i
i
t

-

m

l

d
n
u

r

i

l

s

l

a

i
t

.

P

l
l
i

a

M

d

r
e

a

t

c
a
e
c
e
a
e

l

y
n

S

a

t

i

s
s

f

c

t

o
g

r

y

•

G

r

s
s

e
e
e
e
e
c
a
e
e
e
c
e
e
e
e
e
e
c
c
a
c
a
e
e
a
e

r

l
l
t

m

t

r
r

a
e
e
a

t
t
i

f

i

r

l

s

e
e
a
e

i

r
r

t

r

t

i
t

1
5
n
o

t

r
r

t

a

r

s

s

m

a

r

e

p
o
8
n
u
p
3

t

i

-

.

•

I
r

s

a

r

e
e

c
a
c

i
t

,

t

y
b
d
o

t

a

l

r

l

r

t
i
l
l
t

m

t

s

i

r

a
e

s

e

r

-
-

(

a
c

m

o
o
o
y
v
d
n
n
h
n
p
o
n
h
u
3
v
p
p
0
o
x
o
0
p
h
2
p

f
)
r

p
u
b

s

e
a

t
i
i
l
l

.

•

Q

e

u
d

a
c

i
t

d
n
o

i

o
n
d

t

i

m

r

e
e
e
a
e

.

•

H

a
a
e

t
l

s

r

o
d
u
g
n
p
d
5
h
v
n
o
o
1
p
p
n
p
x
y
5
h
6
n
o
o
n
v
n
d
o

i

e
c

c

e
a
e
c
e
c
e
e

r

e

w

a

s

o
n
h

t

e

,
t

r

t

f

t

e

l

i
t

e
a

s

r

j

t
t
i

.

•

G

r

m

e
e
a

t

e

r
r
r

e
e
e
c
a
e

n
o
n
g

a
e

,
t
l

D
G
w
w

s

l

.
t

t
t

i

2
n
d

t
l

r

t

a

e

t

e

.

2

e

r

e
c

f

P

.

•

F

e
c
a
e
e
r

r

t
i
l
i
i
t
l
.
t

y
n
n

r

a

t

e

s

a
a

y
d
n

c

d
n
o
n
d
d
h
d

l
i
i

a

m

r

a
e

l
.

m

o

r

t

t
i
l

t

d
a

P

l
l
i

4

M

o

d

r
e

a

t

e

l

y

U

n

s

a

t

i

s

f

a

c

t

o

r

y

•

P

r

g
o

r
r

e

s
s
s

t

o

w
w

a
a

r

d

s

s

u
d

s

t
.

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

w

a

t

e

u

e

s

m

a

e

•

I

n
n

U

r

b

a
a
e
e
a
a
e

d
d
v
d
o
h
n
n
n
n
u
o
n
o
o
n
y
o
g
h
0
k
u
0
d
0
n
5

W

e
a
e
e
e
e
a
e
a
a
c
e
e
e

t

r

S

p
d
p
n
d
0
o
0
n
y
u
5
y
o
o
p
7
p
o
u
o
y
p
b
o

l
t
i
l
i

a

S

t
i
t

i
t
i
t

,

v

l
i

a

f

i

e

d

w
w

r

c

r

s

r
r
f

m

e
a
a
a
a
e
e
c

e

f
f
f

r

d
n
d
y
n

s

,

a

r

e

t

s
s
s

,

,

s

l

r

s

e
e

w

r

w

a

t

e

r

s

s

t

m

s

r

e

c
e

i
t

v

l

y

w

r

e

•

T

h

r
r
r
f

s

e
a
c

t

o

a
e
a
a

n
o
n
g
o
u
n
o
g
u
o
g
u
u
u
d
n
d
o
n
n
o
v
d
n
n
d
d
n
h
h
n
n
g
g
o
n
u
o
d
n
h
n
n
u

s

r

e

a

c

l

o
o
o
u
p
o
p
u

r

s
s

f

m

i
i
t
t

t

h

e

o
p
b

r

t
t
t
t
i

i
l
i
t
i
l

f

A
A
A

,
i

e
e

e

e
a
z

t

e
e
e

s

t
i
t

a

l

s

-

t
i
,

a
a

i
t
t
i

f

c
a
e

s

d

s
s

e

m

i
t

i

i
l

r

e
c

o
p
o

r

t

s

r

a
a

s

r

a

t

c
a
c
e

m
m

i

a
c

i
t

t

r

h

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

4
4

-

2
0
0
2

A
C

S

S

t

a

t

u

s

a

t

C

o

m

p

l

e

t

i

o

n

(

F

Y

5
0

)

L

e

s
s
s

o

n
d

s

L

e

o
a

r

n
n

e

d

a
o

d
n
n

C

o

n

i

r
e

a

t

i

s

f

r

e

A
C
w

S

a

d
d

r

e

s
s

e

d

.

•

M

i
l
t
i

g

a
e

i
t
i
t

u
g
h
h
o
d
u
n
o
n
o
n
o

m

a
e
a
a
a
e
c

s

r
r

a
a
a
e

s

g
u

a
a
a

l
l
i
l
l

n

s

t

d

e
e

u
o
p
h

f

t

o
n
n

t

r

r
f

s
s

r
r

e
c
e

s
s

s

s

c

s

t

i

e
e

i

,
t

e
a

i

s

t

o
p

u

i
t

n
o

w

e

r

o
n

m

.
t

C

o

n
u

t

r

y

s
s
I

u

e

s

•

W

a
e
e

h
v
n
o
o
g
n
n
k
u
v
q
o
o
u
b

a
c
e
e
c
c
c
c
a
a

r

g
n
n

m

a
e
e
e

n
y
n
o
o
y
n

t

c

o
o

m
m

l
t
i
i

m

e

n

t

a

d
n

r
f

e
e
e
e
a
e
e

t

s

f

f
f

i

a
c
a
a
e
a
e
c
e

s

.

•

G

r

r
r
r

m

t
i
i
i
l
t
l
t

s

w

u
g
o
n
d
6
n
n
d
0
n
1
k
d
k
d
k
n

s

c

r
r

s

r
r
f

p
n
u
u
q
o
u

r
r

i

s

n
u
9
u
5
u
1
d
v
n

c

i
t

a
e

a
a

e

i
l

i

t
.

Y

m

i

s

r
r

r

o

f

i
.
t
i

•
•

F

i

c

a

r

n
y
o
v

r

l
i

s

k

i

s

h

i
t
i
i

h
y
g

i
i
.

I

s

t
i
l
t
i

e
a
c

a
c

n
p

c
e
a

s

.
t
l

o
n

w

a

d
n

c

i

s

e

r

i

i

s

i

f
f

c

e

•

T

o
o
d
h
p

e
e

s

a

m
m

e
a
e

i

s
s

u
o
b
u
v
n
n
p
p
n
o

e

s

a

r

e
e

s

l
l
i
t

r

i

t

t

t

o
n
o
o
d
h
o

v
o
g

a
e

r

d
n
n

m

e

n

t

i

s

m
m

r
r

e
e
c
c
e
e
a
e

t

r

e

f

r

m

s
s

,

o

r

i
t

e

t

r

’

a

s
s

i

s

t

n

.

T

h
•

e

n
d
u
n
u
h
o
o
g
h
u
n
o
o
h
n
y
y
u
o
n
g
n
o
h
d
g
h
n
n
p
v
u
o
h
o
o
n
g

e

w

C

A

S

s
s

l

:

B

l
i

a
e

c

t
i
t

a
e
a

c

y

f

o

r

c
c

a

i
l
i
t
.
l

m
m

a
c

i
t

u
o
d
n

t

r

c
a
e

h

s

t

r

a

t

a
e

•

E

m

s

e
z

t

u
o
p
b
b
v
h
n
n
o
u
p
d
o
y
o
n
u
n
o
n
p
o
n
o
u
n
d
v
p
d
n
o
k
y
p
u
n
h
v
d
g
u
k
o
g
o
g
n
g
n

e

e
e

f

r

a

c

l

s

e
e
e
a
c
e

f
r

n
g
o

w

-
’
r

t

e

m

e
a
a
a

t

s

a
e
e
c
c
a
a
e
e
e
e
e
a
e
a
c
a
a
e
z
e

i
t

l

a

n

r
(

l
t
i
t
t

N

l

A

a

f

r

r

e

f

o

r

m

)

a
a

d
h
u
p
d
d
d
n
d
n
n
n

i
t

f

c

s

s
s
s

r

e

s
s

i

e
e
c

s

,
.

i

c

l

i

r

n

•

E

m

a
a

s

i

t
i

l
i
t

d
n
n
n

i
i
t
t
i
t

g
n

a

t
t
i
t

r

n
o
o
g
u

t

m

r

s

s

a
e
e

a

l

i
i

s

i
t
t

l

e

t
l

m

m

p

c
a

f

B

i

e

r

n
o

s

.

B

a

k
n

P

r
e

f

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

B
C
R

a

k
n
o

P

e

f
r

p
0
p
5
n
0
o
5
y

r

m

e
c
e
e
c
a
a
e

n

e
c

t
i
:

n
p
5
p
7
2
k
9

e

r

e
e
c

t

m
m
m
m

t
:
i
t
i

e

t

s

t

R

s

:

.

r

e
c

n

t

c
a
a
e

i
l

s

r

n

P

r

o

i
t

v

:

r

n

t

I

E

G

r
r

a

t
i
:
i
i
t
i
.
i
i
t
t

n
g
o
n
n

s

f

9
9
o
h
o

r

B

a
a

2
6
d
k
o
n

P

e
c
e

f
r

o
p
n
5

r
r
f
r

m

a

n
n
o

e
c

a

t

S

p
u
p

e
e
c

v
2
n
0

s

s

w

i
l
.

e
e

m

2
n
9

e

r

C

A

S

t

e
c

t

i

C
C
R

A

S

o

m
m
m
m

e

p
p
5
0
7
n
0
1
y

t

s

e
c
e
c
e
e
a

t

R

i

s

k
n
n

:

p
6
3

.

e

r

e
c

n

t

c
a
a
e

i
l

s

r

t

P

r

o

i
t

v

:

r

t

•

F

r

e

o
v
d
h
o
o
u
n
o
u
o
q
o
o
h
p
o
p
h
h
u
p
d

e

n

t

R
C

P
P
P
P

R

s

a

d
n

f

o

l
l

o

w

-

C

r

c
e

m
m

e
a
e
e
e

n
h
o
p
g
p
o
d
n
h
u
n
g
d
o
u
o
o
n
h
o
d
o
p
n
n
h
o
n
p
n
o

a

i
t
.
t

o
n
h
o
o

s

h

e

l

p

e

d

i

m

r
f
r

r

f

i
l

e

r

m
m
m

a
e
c

T

e
e
z

e
e

w

C

A

S

s

l

s

i
i

t

h
n
n
o
b
n

e
e
e
e

d

f

o

r

a

c

t
l
t
i

s

t
i

r

f
r

t
t

o
p

r

f

i
l

t

r

e
e
a
c

r

s

h

i
t
t
i

p

w

t

e

f

l
l

w

f
-

m
m

e
e

.

•

T

e
e
e

r

i
i

s

a
a

a
e
e

r

t
t

a
e

r

i

s
s

m

n

i
t

i

t

r

n

l

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

5
4

-

2
0
0
2

A
C

S

S

t

a

t

u

s

a

t

C

o

m

p

l

e

t

i

o

n

(

F

Y

5
0

)

L

e

s
s
s

o

n
d

s

L

e

o
a
k

r

n
n

e

d

a
g
o
n

d
n
n

C

o

n

i

r
e
c
e

a
d

t
-

i

s

f

r

e

A
A
C
A
w
A

S

r

o

r

e
e

p

i

o

f

.

A

i

d

C

o
o

r

d

i

n

a

t

i

o

n

•

D

v
u
d
v
d
n
n
d
o
n
n
n
g
d
o
d
h
n
o
y
n
p
o
o
o
p
u
o
p
n
u
v
h
u
o
o
o
o
b
g
n
b
o
o
u
h
h

r

c
e
c
e
a
e

r
r

i
i

a
a

i
i
i
t
t

v
n
n
o
n
n
d
o
o

w

a
a

s

s

t

r

d
o
x
n
u
o
v
o
y
h
n
d
g
o
h
u
d
g
n
n
o
o
h

c

t

r

e

.

F

r

m

l

m

r

s

e
a

s

t
i

t

e

s

i

f

e
c

i

t

a
e
e
c
a
e
e
c

.
t

e

t

o

f

t

P

r

R

c
e
a
a

i
t
l
i

S

i
.
t
i
i
t

r

t

•

S

r
r

s

f

r

i

s

a
e
a
c
c
c
e
a

r

r

f

r

m

,

w

e
e
a
e

t

,

a
e

t
l

e

u
d

e
e

n
g
b
u
b

s

e

t

I

A
D

h
n

r

e

t

s

r

e

r

n

D
U

g
n
u
d
o
o
u
o
d
n
o
o
p
p
d
u
n
h
0
y
0
d
o
2
h
o
n
$
g
o
u
o
p

r

s

r

t
i
l
l
i

s

t

a

t

a

r

d
5
0
u
3
0
d
n
u
o
h

S

m

r

i

t

c
e

F

Y

-

e

r

i

a

f
I

A
D

r

e

s
s

r

e
c

s

n
o

s

t
i
t

t

e

r

l

a

l

o

f

t

h

i

a

m

n
u
o

.
t

•

T

o
h
n
o
n
o
o
d
n
d
o
o
o
h
d
h
o

e

r

e

l

a

i
t

h
p
n
y
d
o
n
v

e
a

l

s

m

a
e
e
a
e

l
l

u
u
h
h
n
u
o

m

b
o

e

r

f

r

s

t

f
r

c
c

s

f

c
c
c
e
c
a
e
e
a
e
c

r

.
i
t
.

l

a
e

r

s
s

t
t

r
r

s

t
/

e

m
m

a
e

s

(

o
g
b
h
d
d
h
u
g
b
h
n
n
d
o
n
d

t
t

w

a

t

e

r

i

t

G

r

m

a
a

a
a
e

D

t

c

a
e
e
e

s
s

i

s

t

a

n
o
n
o
o
d
h
o
n
n
g
d
g
d
o
u
n
d
o
o
h
p
x
n
o
d
h
h
n

e
c

)

f

t
i
l
i
l
l

t

a

i

r

e
e

f

n
h
o
o
h

a
e

o
u
n
b
n
o
n

r

i
t

e

t

w

r

s

.

•

T

e

w

C

A

S

s

l

a
c
e

i
t

a
a
z
e

e
a
e

a

t

e

r

m

l
i
l
i
i

i
t
t
t
i
t

f
f

r

t

s

s

p
p

c
a
a
e
e
e

a

y
g
n

a
e
e

t
.
i

l
t
l

r

s
s

a
a

r

e

h
p

r

r

r

s

r

a

t

e

i

e

t

t

s

m

e

m

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 46 - 

Appendix 3:  Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries  
FY02-05  

CAS PLANS (08/01/2002) Base Case

ACCOMPLISHMENTS (FY03-05)

FY
2003

2004

2005

Urban Water Supply & Sanitation
Port Cities Development Program
Sana'a Basin Water Management
Groundwater & Soil Conservation

Subtotal:  
District & Community Development 
Social Fund For Development III
Second Basic Education Expansion 
Groundwater & Soil Conservation

Subtotal:  
Second Basic Education Expansion 
Girl's Secondary Education
Second Rural Access Program
Second Civil Service Modernization 
Second Vocational Training 

IDA
130.00
23.00
40.00
35.00
228.00
30.00
20.00
60.00
0.00
110.00
0.00
30.00
22.00
15.00
5.00

Subtotal:  

72.00

Actual
Actual
Actual 
Moved to FY 2004

Dropped
Actual
Moved to FY05
Actual

Name changed to Basic Edu. Dev. Prog.
Moved to FY07
Moved to FY06
Dropped
Moved to FY07

Additional Actual Projects:

Third Public Works (2/26/2004)

IDA
130.00
23.40
24.00

177.40

60.00

40.00
100.00
65.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

65.00

45.00

Total:  

410.00

Total:  

387.40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47

Appendix 4:  Planned Non-Lending Services:  FY03-FY05 

CAS PLANS (FY03-05) Product
Economic Sector Work
FY03
Public Expenditure Management
Country Fin. Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Economic Monitoring
Investment Climate
Integrated Framework for Trade
Infrastructure for Mineral Exports
Power Sector Reform
Urban Land Policy & Administration
Gender Note
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy
Rural Energy (ESMAP)
Fisheries Management Support
Public Financial Management 
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Technical Assistance
FY03
Public Service Delivery (IDF)
Procurement Capacity Building (IDF)
Budget & Expenditure Streamlining
Financial Sector Dialogue
Tourism Development (IDF)
Violence Against Women (JSDF)
Development Research Forum
Development Information Center
M&E Capacity Building
Environmental Safeguards
Not initially Planned
Economic Sector Work
FY04
Economic Monitoring
Investment Climate Assessment
Infrastructure for Mineral Exports
Power Sector Reform
Poverty Update
Secondary Education Review
Vocational Training Strategy
Population Policy Note
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy
Coastal Aquifers Development Strategy
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Technical Assistance
FY04
Procurement Capacity Building (IDF)
Public Service Delivery (IDF)
Tourism Development (IDF)
Children at Risk (JSDF)
M&E Capacity Building
Economic Sector Work
FY05
Development Policy Review
Economic Monitoring
Investment Climate
Agricultural & Maricultural Exports Strategy
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy
Urban Land Policy & Administration 

Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Technical Assistance
FY05
Public Service Delivery (IDF)
Tourism Development (IDF)
Children at Risk (JSDF)
M&E Capacity Building
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned
Not initially planned

ACCOMPLISHMENTS (STATUS)

Delivered 
Delivered 06/30/04 

Delivered
Actual carried out in FY 2005
Actual carried out in FY 2004

Delivered

Delivered
Rural Development Strategy Implementation and Ag. Promotion
Poverty Update (initially planned for FY04)
EPI & Public Health Programs

Delivered (Budget Reform and Decentralization, FY05) but not published 
Ongoing 

Delivered

Delivered 3/4/04
Restructuring Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Not delivered in FY04 but Final delivery to client in FY06

Delivered
Delivered in FY03
Not delivered during CAS period but delivered in FY06
Delivered
Delivered
Delivered in FY05
Delivered (6/7/04)
ROSC - Accounting & Auditing
Gender Mainstream (3/31/04)
Gender Note (initially planned for FY03)
Sources of Growth

Delivered (10/10/03)

Ongoing but not delivered by end FY05

Undertaken in FY05 but report and results not completed by end FY05

Delivered
Delivered

Country Social Assessment (Final delivery To client 3/15/06)
Petroleum Pricing Reform (Final delivery to Client: 2/28/05)
Budget/Poverty Impacts of Petroleum Pricing
Women in the Local Economy of Aden (Final delivery to Client: 12/10/05)

Support to National Commissions (Draft delivery to client: 5/30/06)
Coordinating Environmental Health (Final delivery to client: 1/2/06)
Statistical Capacity Building (Delivery to client: 4/14/05)
Public Expenditure Management (Delivery to client: 5/31/05)
Household Budget Survey (Draft delivery to client: 6/24/05)

 
 
 
 
48

 Appendix 5:  IDA Portfolio Assessment   

Number of projects under implementation
Average implementation period (years)
Percent of unsatisfactory projects by number
Percent of unsatisfactory projects by amount
Percent of projects at risk by number
Percent of projects at risk by amount
Disbursement Ratio (%)

FY03
18
3.8
5.6
4.4
11.1
7.5
16.4

FY04
19
4.0
21.1
12.4
21.1
12.4
16.2

FY05
17
3.5
5.9
4
5.9
4
15.8

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 1 - 

ANNEX 4 

YEMEN CAS 2006-2009:  CAS Consultations  1 

1. 
As inputs into the preparation of the Country Assistance Strategy for 
Yemen, the World Bank held four workshops in Yemen during the period November 19-
22, 2005. These CAS consultations with various stakeholders (Government, donors and 
Civil Society) represent the first phase of the CAS preparation to be followed by further 
consultations in March with a clear Bank program for support to the second PRSP. The 
consultations are meant to provide a forum for participants to exchange views on how 
they see the main priorities (social and economic) for the country over the next 5 years 
and what role they envisage for the donor community in assisting Yemen.  

2. 
The participants. Nearly 150 people—almost everyone who was invited—
attended the workshops.  Each workshop was confined to about 30-40 participants, a size 
considered to be optimum from the point of view of active participation by everyone. 
Participants were drawn from different categories of the stakeholders. In most cases, they 
were selected on the basis of their ability to contribute to the discussion. The profile of 
participants is shown in Figure 1 and by location the split was Sana’a (70 percent) and 
Aden (30 percent). Government officials, at the central and local levels, were high and 
middle cadre. The category “others” includes researchers and academicians, 
businessmen, parliamentarians and members of the Shura Council, journalists, 
associations and NGOs (local and international). A special effort was made to ensure 
adequate representation of women in the workshops; with one in four being a woman. 

Figure 1: Composition of Participants 

Participation Composition

6%

43%

35%

16%

6%

28%

14%

52%

Government Donors Others

Academia

Government Donors Others

Academia

Total Participation

Survey Participation

1 This Annex summarizes the findings of a paper on the CAS Consultations prepared by Mustapha Rouis, 
Country Manager. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2

3. 
The Approach. Each workshop was organized in three parts: discussions of 
the key factors shaping the context in which the CAS is being prepared, followed by 
group discussions and exchange of views between participants; and then a survey.  To 
enrich the discussions, a number of background papers were prepared and circulated 
before and during the workshops.  The survey consisted of 6 sets of questions: priority 
areas, obstacles to renewed growth and employment, engine of growth, role of the donor 
community and the World Bank in particular, and questions related to the workshop 
itself. Participants were asked to rank the priorities and rate the importance/relevance of 
each variable. The survey was meant to be indicative and may not be statistically robust 
(in design or selection of the sample). It was designed to analyze the information by 
affiliation and location.  

Key Conclusions From Discussions 

4. 
There are five critical areas for which there seems to be a broad agreement 
to tackle under the CAS. These are: governance, capacity building, human development 
and population, water management and macroeconomic stability. These priorities seem to 
fit broadly within government’s overall priorities in the Development Plan/PRSP. 

5. 
Governance. There was a consensus among all participants that governance 
and public sector management should be high on the development agenda. This 
perception is consistent with the CPIA (2004) ratings and the ICA 2005, where 
corruption was listed as obstacle number three to PSD. The CPIA rating is based on a 
host of indicators, including corruption perception index by Transparency International 
and various WBI indices. Several participants looked up for the Bank to help government 
prepare a credible anti-corruption action plan. Others suggested building, as part of the 
CAS, a strong monitoring and evaluation system. There has to be better government 
accountability in the implementation of donor-funded projects.  

6. 
Donors and some government officials noted that the improvement of 
governance would lead to more financial support by donors. IDA allocation and the 
Millennium Challenge Accounts were two cases pointed, where poor governance led to 
reduction in IDA allocations and to the postponement of Yemen’s access to the MCA 
(Yemen missed the threshold).  Where there was success, it was stated by some 
participants that it was largely due to the strong commitment and integrity of the 
individuals involved. Several participants felt that empowerment of the civil society for 
playing a more meaningful role in advocacy and watchdog as well as providing support 
to the community was essential. 

7. 
Macroeconomic stability. The need for maintaining macroeconomic 
stability was said to be a pre-condition for economic renewal. Reducing inflation, 
stabilizing the exchange rate, and mobilizing non-oil revenues were identified as key 
policy areas. A number of participants emphasized the need to streamline the tax system 
which is cumbersome and excessive. According to “Doing Business” report, Yemen is 
one of only three countries in the world with a cumulative tax burden exceeding earnings. 
This has induced tax evasion and pushed businesses into the informal sector. “It is not 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3

profitable to work legally” as one participant put it. One participant stressed that macro 
stability, while important, should not be carried out at the expense of political and social 
stability and job creation. The causality runs both ways. 

8. 
 Capacity building. Participants felt strongly about the need to better 
balance between economic reform and institutional reform. Strengthening the civil 
service, parliament, judicial system and land registration were listed as priority areas. 
Private sector development will continue to be impaired if the institutional capacity 
(public and private) is not adequately developed. Also, several participants emphasized 
the need for government and donors to ensure that donor-funded projects are well 
designed and ready for implementation and to establish a clear monitoring and evaluation 
system.   

9. 
 Human Development and Population. While Yemen has made good 
progress on basic education, a lot remains to be done despite the fact that the country 
spends over 8% of its GDP on education. Health is another area where progress has been 
painfully slow. It is well established that investment in education leads to growth and 
reduction in the fertility rate, which both would in turn lead to poverty reduction. Also, 
investment in people would lead to strengthening the institutional capacity. A few 
participants voiced concern about the fact that too much resources is going to HRD and 
little to the real sectors and infrastructure. Others emphasized the need to invest more in 
vocational training (Aden) as a prerequisite for PSD. The issue of population control was 
accepted by most participants as an important challenge to be tackled if the government is 
to be able to provide basic social services (education, health, drinking water, etc.) 

10. 
 Water Resources Management. There was recognition by participants, 
particularly donors that Yemen suffers from low endowments in water resources and 
deficient use of those resources. Improvement in water demand management would 
require significant support from the donor community, including the Bank. 

Survey Results and Interpretations 

11. 
According to the survey results, the three top priority reform areas 
identified by participants were: governance, security and human development in that 
order of priority. These were followed closely by macroeconomic stability. The ranking 
varies slightly across categories. For government participants macroeconomic stability 
came ahead of security; for the civil society (“others”, including academia) macro 
stability was ranked ahead of human development; and for donors water management 
was ranked ahead of macro stability. This ranking is largely consistent with the 
discussions, with the exception of the fact that institutional building and population were 
listed among the priority areas in the discussions and security not. 

12. 
It is interesting to note that security was ranked relatively low on the scale 
of priorities by donors. The civil society and the Aden participants rated security on the 
top of the agenda. This is rather surprising as government has made good progress on this 
score. It is quite likely that security here was interpreted in the broad since to include lack 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4

of enforcement of the rule of law and weak judicial system. This issue did not surface 
during the actual discussions; expect that it was mentioned as an impediment to private 
sector development. But the ICA survey ranks “crime, theft and disorder” low on the list 
of constraints to growth. 

13. 
According to the survey, the three major obstacles to Yemen’s economic 
development were: weak commitment to reform, weak institutional capacity and lack of 
security in the country. This ranking cuts across all groups, except donors, who 
surprisingly put resource constraint ahead of security. It is also interesting that 
government participants ranked lack of commitment to reform as the second most 
important obstacle.  This finding is broadly consistent with the findings of existing 
studies as well as the first annual PRSP Progress Report. It should be noted, however, 
that government has made good progress on improving security in the country over the 
past three years. Regarding capacity building, most participants stressed the critical 
importance of administrative reform (at the central and regional level), judicial reform, 
and institutional support to parliament and local councils.    

Conclusion 

14. 
There was a lively discussion, with active participation of almost every 
participant. Participants were thankful to the World Bank for organizing such workshops 
and suggested holding similar workshops in other parts of the country. The overall rating 
of the workshops was 4.8 (1 being low and 6 high), with only a handful of participants 
rating it less than 3. The local press reported about the workshops. 

15. 
The main messages expressed by most participants during the discussions 
and through the survey which was conducted at the end of each workshop are: 
• The economic outlook for Yemen is bleak and the main sources of growth and 
employment are labor-intensive industries (SMEs), rural development and energy. 
Tourism, fisheries and transport (Aden Container Terminal) were also mentioned; 
• The top priority areas over the medium term are: governance (with emphasis on 
PSD), institutional building (linked to human development), water resources 
management, population, and macroeconomic stability; 
• The three major obstacles to Yemen’s economic development are weak commitment 
to reform, weak institutional capacity and lack of  security; 
Improved  design and readiness of Bank-funded projects were singled out as 
contributing factors to slow pace of  implementation;   
• The perceived role for donor community is to provide institutional building (training, 
TA) and analytical work. The role of the World Bank is perceived in the same way, 
with the addition of lending; finally 
• While there does not seem to be an information gap among the participants about 
government’s economic reform program - a reflection of the fact that participants 
were selected precisely because of their knowledge of the issues and capacity to 
contribute to the discussions - there was a consensus that public awareness of the 
scope and depth of government reform program is limited. Government needs to 
intensify its effort to communicate with the people. 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
- 1 - 

Annex 5 

CAS Instruments: Contributions to Country Development Goals  

1. 
This Annex provides further details on the use of CAS instruments to support 
each pillar and achieve the CAS Results identified in Annex 2. 

Country Strategy, Analysis and Outcome Monitoring 
2. 
   Some key activities are being undertaken which will have an impact across all 
of the different CAS pillars.  
• The Development Policy Review would be completed in FY06 and has informed both 
the Government’s Second PRSP and the Bank’s CAS;  
• There would also be ongoing support to PRSP implementation.   
• The FY06 Country Social Analysis has also informed the country strategy work.  
• Upon the conclusion of the ongoing Household Budget Survey, a National Poverty 
Assessment would be undertaken in FY06 and the report completed in early FY07 
and would be complemented by an Urban Poverty Analysis for Taiz (FY07).   
• There would also be advisory support for the implementation of the Statistical Master 
Plan which encompasses the monitoring and evaluation systems of the Government. 
• A key challenge facing Yemen is that domestically there is little sense of urgency in 
dealing with the impending crises.  A key area of new support (starting in FY07) 
would be to improve the outreach capacity of the Government to formulate and 
disseminate reform messages domestically.  The CAS preparation process has already 
been utilized to facilitate dialogue on the key issues facing Yemen; this would be 
reinforced during CAS 
implementation by engaging various audiences and 
institutions.  Concrete discussions would be held in the context of Bank lending and 
non-lending programs (e.g. engaging civil society in dissemination of knowledge 
products in order to facilitate dialogue on the key issues facing Yemen).  The 
objective will be to reach beyond traditional audiences and engage different 
stakeholder groups by re-packaging messages in a manner that can be understood and 
debated more widely.  
• One issue on which the Bank will continue to provide support relates to an ongoing 
contractual dispute between the Government and a foreign contractor under a now 
closed IDA-financed project. An arbitration award was rendered in favor of the 
contractor. With the support and encouragement of the Bank, a technical opinion has 
been prepared by independent experts on the level of contribution that IDA could 
finance out of the value of the disputed claims. The Government has accepted the 
opinion and the Bank expects to continue its effort to support both parties in reaching 
a satisfactory solution. 

Growth 
3. 
Bank Program. The Bank program would consist of: 
• Two existing projects which would continue to be implemented during the CAS 
period with the Southern Governorates Agricultural Privatization project closing in 

 
 
 
 
 
2

FY06 and the first phase of the Port Cities Development APL closing mid-way 
through the CAS period.   
• An Investment Climate Assessment would be delivered in FY06 and inform the 
priority setting process for private sector development issues.  
• There would be six new investment loans (Fisheries; Rainfed Agriculture and 
Livestock; Rural Energy Access, Power Sector, Phase II of the Port Cities 
Development APL and Second Vocational Training).  These loans would address 
constraints to growth noted earlier. 
• While 
the FY07 Institutional Reform Credit would primarily support 
the 
Government’s National Agenda For Reform (including actions on governance, public 
sector reform and private sector development actions), it would also include actions 
supporting improved governance in the private, financial and other sectors.   
• Policy advice provided under the FY07 Gas Incentive Framework study would assist 
the Government in ensuring that the rules of the game in this key growth sector would 
be appropriately set to maximize growth and fiscal benefits.   
• Focused transport sector work would be undertaken in FY08.   
• Finally, periodic support would be provided to the Government in hosting events for 
new investors highlighting Yemen’s investment potential.   

4. 
IFC program.  Yemen is one of the “frontier” countries in the MENA region, and 
IFC is dedicating an extra effort to develop the private sector in the country. 
IFC’s current investment portfolio is US$9 million for 3 companies.  In FY06, IFC has 
developed a strong pipeline of projects in sectors such as oil refining, ports, and cement, 
which could be committed between FY06-07.  In addition to the investment pipeline 
above, IFC’s focus in the future is in the financial sector, including leasing and 
microfinance.   In parallel with this investment program, IFC has also increased technical 
assistance activities through PEP-MENA and placed staff in Sana'a, co-located with the 
World Bank.  The focus of the TA program in the country is on four main areas: financial 
markets, SME development, gender, as well as Business Enabling Environment (BEE).   
• 
In financial markets, IFC has been active in leasing programs (including work with 
the Central Bank on leasing registration and legislation and the organization of an 
international leasing conference in the country) and is initiating a microfinance TA to 
support the initiatives of the second largest Yemeni bank to service this sector.   
In SME development, IFC has focused on management training through Business 
Edge, including Train-the-Trainer programs for training companies in Yemen, 
Chambers of Commerce, and the Social Fund for Development.   
IFC’s gender program work has included a scoping and analysis exercise and is 
preparing to launch a two-year TA program focusing on gender and entrepreneurship.  
In coordination with the Bank-financed Port Cities Development Program, IFC is 
initiating a “Business Start-Up Simplification” activity that would focus on 
simplifying administrative procedures at the central Government level as well as the 
implementation of reforms at the local level in selected port cities.  PEP-MENA will 
also be focused on responding to a Government request to improve the country’s 
policy framework to promote private investment in mining, including assistance to 
the Granite and Marble Association which would strengthen SMEs in that industry.  

• 

• 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
3

• 

Human Development 
5. 
The program would consist of: 
• Eight ongoing projects (with around US$250 million undisbursed at the start of the 
CAS period) which would provide support to programs in basic education, health, 
rural roads and social development and a small Learning and Innovation Credit for 
higher education. 
• There would be four new investment loans:  Girls Secondary Education; a Second 
Population Project (which would possibly utilize alternative delivery mechanisms 
such as Community Driven Development interventions); the second phase of the 
Rural Access Program; and a social development loan.   With regard to the social 
development loan, support would be provided to the highly successful Social Fund 
for Development (SFD).  Further, the institutional framework for provision of 
infrastructure for basic services would be rationalized to eliminate overlaps between 
line ministries, the Public Works Program and the SFD. 
• Given the Government’s desire to contribute additional resources to the programs of 
the Social Fund for Development, a portion of the local currency equivalent of funds 
disbursed under the Institutional Reform Credit could be passed through to the SFD 
for implementation of agreed programs.   
In the near-term, the non-lending focus will be on gaining consensus around the 
health sector reform process which is also expected to support the Government in the 
development of a Nutrition Strategy. 
In FY07, the Disability Situation Analysis and Strategic Framework carried out in 
FY06 would be finalized and is expected to contribute to the development of a 
National Strategy for Disability.   
• The qat survey which is being undertaken in FY06-07 will be completed and its 
findings used to re-engage on a public dialogue on the impact of qat.   
In the medium-term, based on the updated poverty data in the National Poverty 
Assessment, the Social Protection Strategy would be reviewed and updated in FY07. 
• With the completion of sub-sectoral analysis (basic education, secondary education, 
TVET and higher education), the various pieces would be consolidated into an 
Overall Education Strategy.   In FY09, ESW on Early Childhood Development would 
be undertaken. 
In FY09, a Gender Status Update is planned in order to take stock of progress in 
improving gender outcomes.   
• Throughout the CAS period, ongoing support would be provided to the Children and 
Youth Strategy which the Government is implementing through mainstreaming into 
the Second PRSP.   
• Beyond the end of the CAS period, the Second PRSC would be expanded to the 
education sector starting with basic education in FY10. 

• 

• 

• 

Fiscal Sustainability  
6. 
The program would consist of: 
• An ongoing Technical Assistance project supporting the public sector reform pillar 
which is projected to be completed mid-way through the CAS period.    An FY07  
Institutional Reform Credit would support the Government in implementing (as prior 
actions) the activities contained in the Government’s National Reform Program; these 

 
 
 
 
4

actions encompass both public sector reform and private sector development.  
Further, the IRC would support the implementation of the Civil Service Reform 
program – particularly in financing retrenchment of civil servants.  These activities 
would be complemented with governance related technical assistance from yet-to-be-
identified grant funding (from donors and potentially from Bank-financed grant 
facilities).   In case the above efforts should not result in the appropriate level of 
funding, the Bank would revisit, in partnership with other donors, the need for further 
support to civil service reform at the time of the 2008 CAS Progress Report. 
• Technical Assistance would be provided to Yemen in joining the Extractive 
Industries Transparency Initiative and subsequently, in participating in the EITI. 
• Following up the Urban Land Policy and Administration Policy Note, Technical 
Assistance would be provided to: strengthen the legal and regulatory framework for 
land; support the Government’s effort to improve institutional arrangements relating 
to public land management and land administration, and initiate land registration pilot 
projects.  The objective would be to complement these activities with (yet to be 
identified) donor 
funding 
for 
any physical 
investments 
and 
technical 
assistance/information system support. 
• A Public Expenditure Review would commence in FY07 and be completed by FY08; 
the goal would be to assist the Government in evaluating sectoral expenditures (and 
outcomes) and supporting medium-term expenditure planning processes.  The Public 
Expenditure Tracking Survey work – which has commenced in FY06 and would be 
completed in FY07 – would supplement the PER.    
• Ongoing Technical Assistance on procurement reforms would continue under the new 
CAS and assist the Government in implementing the significant agenda defined in the 
National Agenda For Reform.   With the completion of these activities, a Country 
Procurement Assessment Review would be undertaken in FY08 to assess progress 
and provide guidance on the next phase of the reform.  Similarly, implementation 
support will be provided under the CAS to the implementation of the Ten Year Public 
Financial Management Strategy and associated Action Plan.  An assessment on 
progress would be made through a Country Financial Accountability Assessment in 
FY08.  The results of these assessments would also be utilized to strengthen 
Government fiscal management and fiduciary systems in the context of the FY09 
First PRSC.   

Resource Sustainability 
7. 
The program would consist of:   
• Six ongoing projects (with around US$250 million undisbursed at the start of the 
CAS period) which would support the environmental sustainability pillar including 
groundwater management, irrigation and urban and rural water supply.   
• There will a new second phase APL provided for the Urban Water Supply and 
Sanitation program in FY08.   
• Further, rural water supply would be supported through a series of programmatic 
development policy loans commencing in FY09 with the First Poverty Reduction 
Support Credit.  This would allow consolidation of currently separate projects 
(including APLs) for rural water supply and sanitation, groundwater management and 
irrigation programs.  

 
 
 
 
5

• 

In continuation of the work undertaken previously under two Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) Medium Sized Projects, there could be follow-up GEF support to 
integrated coastal zone management.  The proposed GEF activity would be developed 
in conjunction with the Port Cities Development Program to integrate global 
environmental issues into local development planning and with the Fisheries Project 
to improve sustainable management of marine resources. 
 There will be ongoing TA support to the implementation of the NWSSIP and the 
Country Water Resource Assistance Strategy and to addressing selected issues (e.g. 
desalination).   
• Finally, the Population II Project and the Girls Secondary Education Project 
(discussed under the Human Development pillar) would also be important elements in 
addressing resource sustainability issues. 

• 

8. 
The proposed lending and non-lending programs are summarized in the Tables 
overleaf.    The Tables also show the pipeline of lending and non-lending activities in the 
outer years (i.e. beyond the CAS period).  This has been done for three reasons.  First, 
some activities are programmed for the year beyond the CAS but will be in the fifth year 
of the PRSP (i.e. PRSC-II; PER- II and Transport Policy Note II).  Second, some 
important lending activities (Integrated Urban Development, Higher Education and Solid 
Waste Management) could not be included under the CAS program due to IDA 
constraints and are shown in the outer years.  If IDA allocations should improve 
significantly or if projects currently considered to be priority should not be prepared, then 
consideration would be given to accelerating these projects.  Finally, a non-lending 
activity on decentralization has been kept in the outer years.   While decentralization 
issues would be addressed through other ESW (including the PER, the CFAA and 
CPAR), if the Government should seek further advice on fiscal decentralization, then this 
task would be implemented in the CAS period.  This approach would avoid the problems 
under previous CASs where significant fiscal decentralization related lending and non-
lending activities were initiated but never brought to closure. 

 
 
 
 
6

TABLE A: Proposed Lending Program by Fiscal Year 

FY06 

$mm FY07 

$mm FY08 

$mm FY09 

Rural Access 
APL II  

Fisheries  

Power 
Sector  

40 Rainfed 
Agriculture 
& Livestock  

25 Vocational 
Training II 
50 Social 
Development 

Institutional 
Reform  

Total 

115 

50 Population 

35 Port Cities 
APL II 
15 PRSC I  

20 Urban 
Water 
Supply 
APL II 
15 Rural 
Energy 
15 Girls 
Secondary 
Education 

50 

100 

100 

$mm Outer Years 
1 
25 PRSC II   

40 

35 Solid Waste 
Management  
Integrated 
Urban 
Development 
 Higher 
Education 

100 

TABLE B: Proposed Economic and Sector Work by Fiscal Year 

FY06 
Development 
Policy Review  
Investment 
Climate 
Assessment 
Country Social 
Analysis 

FY07 
Poverty 
Assessment 
Public Expenditure 
Tracking Surveys 

Taiz Urban 
Poverty Analysis 

Gas Incentive 
Framework Policy 
Note 
Social Protection 
Strategy 
Qat Survey and 
Policy Note 

FY08 
Public Expenditure 
Review  
Country 
Procurement 
Assessment 
Country Financial 
Accountability 
Assessment 
Overall Education 
Strategy  

Transport Sector 
Policy Note 
Rural Land Tenure 
Study 

FY09 
Gender Report 

Early Childhood 
Education Review 

Outer Years 
Public Expenditure 
Review II 
Transport Sector 
Policy Note II 

Investment 
Climate Update 

Decentralization 
Review 

Development 
Policy Review 
Update 

1 Outer years column includes activities that are expected to occur after the CAS period – some of these 
activities are being deferred due to resource constraints (either IDA allocation or administrative budget) 
and might be accelerated if such constraints are alleviated. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
7

TABLE C: Proposed Technical Assistance & Implementation Support 
by Fiscal Year 

Activity 
Overall Support 
PRSP Support 
Statistical Master Plan  
Qat  
Strategic Communications 
Public Sector Management 
Procurement  
Public Financial Management Action Plan  
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 
Land Management & Urban Upgrading Pilots 
Private Sector Development 
Private Sector Support (including through potential investors’ meetings) 
Human Development 
Health Sector Dialogue and Consultation 
Children & Youth Strategy  
Disability Situation Analysis and Strategic Framework 
Resource Sustainability 
National Water Strategy  
Environment 

Fiscal Years  

Throughout 
Throughout 
FY08-09 
FY07-09 

Throughout 
Throughout 
FY07-09 
FY08-09 

Throughout 

FY06-07 
Throughout 
FY07 

Throughout 
Throughout 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 6 

 
 
 
 
ANNEX 7 

 
Yemen, Rep. at a glance

CAS Annex A2 
Page 1 of 2 

4/28/06

POVERTY and SOCIAL

2004
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
Average annual growth, 1998-04
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1998-04)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment  (% of school-age population)
    Male
    Female

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1984
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1984-94

1994-04

..
..
..

5.0
2.0
2.8

Yemen

19.8
550
10.9

3.0
2.8

42
26
63
75
46
69
52
83
98
68

1994
3.8
21.0
51.2
13.6
27.6
6.6
1.3
161.4
3.6
..
..

2003

3.1
0.0
2.5

M. East
& North
Africa

294
2,000
589

Low-
income

2,338
510
1,184

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

1.8
-1.3

..
56
68
45
..
88
69
100
104
94

2003
10.8
24.4
38.0
20.5
23.5
-0.1
0.5
47.7
3.2
34.9
69.5

2004

2.6
-0.5
-8.1

1.8
2.1

..
31
58
79
44
75
61
94
101
88

2004
13.1
23.3
38.6
25.9
27.1
2.0
0.5
42.4
3.4
29.4
60.5

2004-08

3.3
0.2
5.7

GNI
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

Yemen, Rep.
 Low-income group

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Capital 
formation

Indebtedness

Yemen, Rep.
 Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

1984

1994

2003

2004

Growth of capital and GDP (%)

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

23.6
25.1
14.2
55.7
67.6
18.8
58.7

14.4
40.6
4.7
45.0
62.4
16.7
41.4

60
40
20
0
-20
-40

13.8
40.9
4.5
45.3
60.3
16.2
38.3

99

00

01

02

03

04

GCF

GDP

1984-94

1994-04

2003

2004

Growth of exports and imports (%)

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

4.4
5.6
7.7
4.6
3.6
6.3
5.4
1.5

-4.6
-7.8
-4.0
20.6
2.0
3.2
16.9
8.1

60
40

20

0

-20

-40

2.4
0.3
3.1
5.2
6.1
6.3
4.9
0.6

99

00

01

02

03

04

Exports

Imports

Note: 2004 data are preliminary estimates.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will 
    be incomplete.

 
 
CAS Annex B2 
Page 2 of 2 

Yemen, Rep.

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1984

1994

2003

2004

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance*
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

..
..

49.4
25.8

11.9
12.6

12.0
16.0

..
..
..

13.4
-11.5
-14.7

30.2
4.2
-4.8

32.0
7.3
-2.3

TRADE

1984

1994

2003

2004

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
   Crude oil (government share)
   Crude oil (company share)
   Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
   Food
   Fuel and energy
   Capital goods
Export price index (2000=100)
Import price index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

1,796
753
862
11
1,522
458
84
332
61
114
54

3,923
1,828
1,624
139
3,557
1,398
582
1,033
102
103
99

4,662
2,233
2,026
150
3,858
1,557
528
1,168
132
110
120

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1984

1994

2003

2004

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

1,944
2,226
-282
-532
1,064
250
-398
149

4,226
4,608
-382
-827
1,201
-8
591
-583

4,997
4,958
39
-1,063
1,280
256
505
-761

..
..

357
80.8

4,445
186.2

5,108
183.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1984

1994

2003

2004

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
    IBRD
    IDA
Total debt service
    IBRD
    IDA
Composition of net resource flows
    Official grants
    Official creditors
    Private creditors
    Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
    Portfolio equity (net inflows)
W orld Bank program
    Commitments
    Disbursements
    Principal repayments
    Net flows
    Interest payments
    Net transfers

3,001
0
294
120
0
3

6,125
0
780
106
0
13

5,375
0
1,568
172
0
34

5,473
0
1,701
219
0
41

251
230
12
7
0

82
66
-5
16
0

129
58
0
6
0

73
44
0
144
0

59
45
1
45
3
42

33
37
7
30
6
24

47
89
23
66
11
55

210
92
26
66
15
52

Development Economics
*Ratios refer to central government finances alone and do not include subnational governments.

4/28/06

40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20

99

00

01

02

03

04

GDP deflator

CPI

Inflation (%)

0

1,000

2,000

3,000

4,000

5,000

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

Exports

Imports

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

98

99

00

01

02

03

04

Current account balance to GDP (%)

G: 298

D: 483

C: 376

B: 1,701

F: 77

E: 2,538

A - IBRD
B - IDA    
C - IMF

D - Other multi lateral

E - Bi lateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

Composition of 2004 debt (US$ mill.)

 
 
 
Republic of Yemen - CAS Annex B2 
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of Date 04/20/2006

CAS Annex B2 

Indicator

2003

2004

2005

18
3.2
5.6
4.4
11.1
7.5
20.0

19
3.3
21.1
12.6
21.1
12.6
16.5

17
3.4
5.9
4.0
5.9
4.0
15.8

2006
Jul 05-Apr 06

18
3.7
5.6
3.8
5.6
3.8
19.8

 1,251.4
54.4

 1,605.4 1,898.9
76.4
94.9

1,915.0
85.0

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80
107
1,451.8
26.7
21.7

Last Five FYs
12
306.8
25.0
17.2

Note:  Supervision Resources and Average Supervision Costs for FY06 are projected

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the 
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

               
 
Republic of Yemen:  CAS Annex B3 - Proposed Lending Program

As of Date 04/20/2006

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

2006

2007

2008

2009

Second Rural Access Improvement [approved]
Fisheries Res. Mgt & Conservation [approved]
Power Sector
Result

Rainfed Agriculture and Livestock
Second Vocational Training Project
Social Development
Institutional Reform Credit
Result

Urban Water Supply APL Phase II
Rural Energy Access
Girls Secondary Education
Result

Yemen Population II
Port Cities APL Phase II
First Poverty Reduction Support Credit 
Result

Overall Result

 40.0
 25.0
 50.0
 115.0

 20.0
 15.0
 15.0
 50.0
 100.0

 50.0
 35.0
 15.0
 100.0

 25.0
 35.0
 40.0
 100.0

 415.0

Strategic 
Rewards b 
(H/M/L)
H
M
M

H
M
M
H

M
M
H

H
M
H

a.  This Table presents the proposed program for four fiscal years.
b.  For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be
     high (H), moderate (M), or low (L)

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 of 1

Implementation b  
Risks (H/M/L)

M
L
L

M
M
L
H

L
L
L

H
L
H

 
 
 
 
 
 
Republic of Yemen:  CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services

CAS Annex B4 
Page 1 of 1 

Product

Recent completions
Urban Land Policy & Admin 
Water Sector Reform
Public Expenditure Mgt.
Women in Local Economy
Statistical Capacity Building (TA)
Rural energy (TA)
National Strategy Child & Youth
Petroleum Pricing Reform
Environment Capacity
Rural Dev. Agric.
Country Social Analysis
Secondary Education

Ongoing
Education for All
Development Policy Review
Investment Climate Assessment
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS)
Assistance on Water Strategy Impl
Household Budget--2005/2006
National Disability Study

Planned
Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys
Taiz Urban Poverty Analysis & Strategy
Social Protection Strategy
Qat Survey & Policy Note
Gas Sector Incentive framework
Public Expenditure Review
Overall Education Strategy
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Transport Sector Policy Note
Gender Report
Early Childhood Development Review
Country Assistance Strategy (2010-2014)
Development Policy Review Update
Investment Climate Assessment Update

As Of Date 04/20/2006

Completion
FY

Cost 
(US$000)

Audience a

Objective b

2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2006
2006

2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006

2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2008
2008
2008
2008
2008
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009

125
71
125
3.5
39
21
88
102
13
53
150
100

123
200
300
100
65
80
25

150
100
100
150
50
50
200
100
150
150
100
100
100
150
100
100

Government, Bank
Bank, Government
Bank, Government, Donor
Bank, Government
Bank, Government
Bank, Government
Bank, Government, Donors
Bank, Government, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government
Bank, Government
Bank, Government

Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation, problem solving
Problem solving, Public dissemination
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation, problem solving

Bank, Government
Bank, Government
Bank, Government, Donors
Bank, Government
Government, Bank
Government, Bank
Government

Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Public dissemination
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Problem solving, Knowledge generation

Government, Bank
Bank, Government, Donors
Bank, Government
Government, Bank
Government
Government, Bank
Bank, Government
Government, Bank, Donors
Bank, Government, Donors
Bank, Government, Donors
Government
Government
Bank, Government, Donors
Bank, Government
Bank, Government, Donors
Government

Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Problem solving, Public dissemination
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Problem solving, Knowledge generation
Problem solving
Problem solving, Public dissemination
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Problem solving
Knowledge generation, Problem solving

a.  Audience = Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b.  Objective = Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

 
 
 
 
 
Republic of Yemen - Social Indicators 

Millennium Development Goals, 1990-20041,2 

1990 

1994 

39.0 

8.0 

51.7 

50.0 

4.0 

9.3 

69.0 
98.0 
142.0 

31.0 
89.0 
126.0 

1400.0 

1.Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20% 
Population below $1 a day (%) 
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (%) 
Poverty gap ratio at $1 a day (%) 
Poverty headcount, national (% of population) 
Prevalence of underweight in children (under five years of age) 

2. Achieve universal primary education 
Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group) 
Primary completion rate, total (% of relevant age group) 
Proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who reach grade 5 
Youth literacy rate (% of age group 15-24) 

3. Promote gender equality and empower women 
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%) 
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%) 
Ratio of young literate females to males (age group 15-24) 
Share of women employed in non-agricultural sector (%) 

4. Reduce child mortality 
Immunization, measles (% of children aged 12-23 months) 
Infant mortality rate (per 1000 live births) 
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1000) 

5. Improve maternal health 
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total) 
Maternal mortality ratio ( per 100,000 live births)3 

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases 
Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of women aged 15-49) 
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) 
Prevalence of HIV, (% of population aged 15-49) 
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%) 

7. Ensure environmental sustainability 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Access to improved sanitation (% of population) 
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita) 
Forest area (% of total land area) 
GDP per unit of energy use (2000 PPP $ per kg oil equivalent) 

8.Develop a global partnership for development 
Aid per capita (current US$) 
Debt service (% of exports) 
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1000 people) 
Internet users (per 1000 people) 
Personal computers (per 1000 people) 

General indicators 
Adult literacy rate (% of people aged 15 and over) 
Fertility rate, total (births per woman) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Population, total (millions) 
Roads, Paved (% of total roads) 

CAS Annex B5 

2000 

2003 

2004 

33.06 

36.0 

67.1 
57.9 
74.5 

1.0 
55.6 

6.7 

71.8 
65.5 

67.97 

1.0 
60.8 
60.3 
6.1 

65.5 

0.0 

6.1 

71.0 
84.0 
117.0 

66.0 
82.0 
113.0 

66.0 
82.0 
113.0 

570.0 

1997 

7.44 
15.7 
36.0 
4.5 
41.85 
46.1 

57.4 
57.8 

1.0 
50.0 

7.4 

46.0 

21.6 

9.7 
137.6 

121.8 

20.8 
111.1 

101.4 

30.0 

54.3 

69.0 
21.0 
0.7 
1.0 
2.8 

34.1 
7 
11.0 

7.5 
52.2 
11.9 
9.1 

0.7 

3.4 

11.5 
4 
12.4 

40.0 
6.5 

14.8 
8.1 

0.8 

3.6 

22.2 
4 
14.1 
0.2 
1.2 

6.4 
55.0 
16.1 
8.1 

0.5 
0.9 
3.7 

15.1 
5 
20.6 
0.8 
1.9 

46.0 

17.5 
11.5 

23.0 
92.5 
0.1 
43.3 

69.0 
30.0 

3.7 

12.7 
4 
48.9 

7.4 

49.0 
6.0 
57.7 
19.2 

23.0 
92.5 
0.1 
43.3 

12.7 
4 

6.0 
57.7 
19.8 
12.0 

1 Data refers to the nearest available year. 
2 The table is based on World Development Indicators Database of the World Bank. 
3 No national data on maternal mortality available. Estimates derived from model.. 
4 Survey year: 1998. Refers to consumption shares by percentiles of population. Ranked by percapita consumption. 
5 Data refers to 1998 Household Budget Survey (HBS) conducted in Yemen. 
6 1999-2001 average. 
7 UNESCO Institute of Statistics estimates, data for 2000-04. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CAS Annex B6 

Yemen, Rep. - Key Economic Indicators

Actual     
2002
2003

Estimate
2005

Projected
2007
2008

Indicator

2000

2001

2004

2006

2009

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
   Agriculture
   Industry
   Services

100
14
46
40

100
15
41
44

100
15
39
47

100
14
40
45

100
14
41
45

100
14
39
47

100
14
38
48

100
14
36
49

100
14
35
51

100
15
34
52

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
   Government investment
   Private investment

75
18
7
11

80
19
7
12

80
22
9
13

79
23
10
13

76
23
9
14

71
21
7
14

72
22
7
15

73
32
9
23

75
34
9
26

79
26
9
17

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

42
37

37
39

39
40

38
41

39
38

45
39

42
42

36
41

30
40

30
35

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

26
33

20
27

20
26

20
23

26
27

29
26

28
26

27
26

25
26

21
22

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

9514

9653

10314

11104

13031

14293

16399

17764

19212

20853

430

470

490

520

570

600

650

680

720

760

Real annual growth rates
   Gross domestic product at market prices
   Gross Domestic Income

4.4
4.6

4.6
2.9

3.9
5.3

3.1
3.5

2.6
5.5

3.8
10.7

3.9
6.4

2.5
3.0

3.0
3.5

4.5
5.3

Real annual percapita growth rates
   Gross domestic product at market prices
   Total consumption
   Private consumption

1.3
(3.5)
(5.4)

1.4
8.8
7.8

0.7
0.6
(1.1)

(0.1)
(0.8)
(1.0)

(0.6)
2.9
2.9

0.6
6.5
0.1

0.8
4.5
2.0

(0.6)
(2.1)
2.0

(0.1)
1.3
1.5

1.4
0.7
1.5

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
  Exports (GNFS)b
      Merchandise FOB
   Imports (GNFS)b
      Merchandise FOB
  Resource balance
  Net current transfers
  Current account balance

4015
3805
3475
2635
540
1400
1266

3470
3302
3657
2771
(187)
1273
507

3857
3584
3989
3083
(132)
1384
534

4226
3923
4608
3557
(382)
1201
(8)

4997
4654
4958
3858
39
1280
256

6845
6624
5535
4338
1310
1171
709

7448
7026
7839
6198
(392)
1221
(794)

6951
6415
8275
6593
(1325)
1332
(1483)

6377
5825
8690
7031
(2313)
1350
(2190)

6572
6339
6894
5687
(322)
1380
(360)

  Net private foreign direct investment
  Long-term loans (net)
    Official
    Private

(11)
(46)
55
(101)
217
(1427)

92
94
32
62
69
(762)

39
53
57
(4)
126
(752)

(131)
126
58
68
596
(583)

193
96
44
52
134
(679)

(146)
89
61
28
(194)
(458)

1847
146
196
(50)
(968)
(231)

857
82
205
(123)
92
452

882
63
205
(142)
121
1124

(288)
35
208
(173)
125
488

  Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

  Change in reservesd

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
  Merchandise exports (FOB)
    Primary
    Manufactures
  Merchandise imports (CIF)

5.7

(1.9)

(1.3)

(3.4)

0.3

9.2

(2.4)

(7.5)

(12.0)

(1.5)

0.0
(2.6)
(36.5)
19.5

(0.8)
(0.8)
43.7
5.8

5.9
3.2
168.4
12.1

(1.2)
(0.8)
(13.8)
15.1

(2.0)
(2.8)
9.6
1.5

3.2
0.2
92.4
17.2

(9.8)
(10.6)
12.0
33.5

(2.2)
(2.9)
9.0
5.5

(1.8)
(2.9)
11.4
7.4

17.2
17.2
12.7
(18.8)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
  Current revenues
  Current expenditures
  Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
  Capital expenditure
  Foreign financing

39.2
25.8
13.4
5.4
0.7

35.3
25.2
10.1
7.5
0.3

33.6
27.7
5.9
7.1
0.6

30.9
26.7
4.2
9.1
0.8

32.0
24.7
7.3
7.9
1.1

38.1
31.5
6.6
9.3
0.8

36.4
32.3
4.1
8.8
1.7

32.2
28.4
3.8
8.7
1.6

28.6
26.4
2.2
8.8
1.1

28.6
26.4
2.2
8.8
1.1

Monetary indicators
  M2/GDP
  Growth of M2 (%)
  Private sector credit growth /
  total credit growth (%)

21.5
(13.4)
(7.1)

23.8
15.4
(25.7)

25.6
17.5
(16.1)

26.1
18.3
(5320.7)

26.2
19.6
(175.9)

23.5
9.4
(10.6)

22.3
18.4
100.0

25.0
19.4
78.0

24.2
10.3
81.0

23.4
13.7
61.3

Price indices( YR90 =100)
  Merchandise export price index
  Merchandise import price index
  Merchandise terms of trade index
  Oil price index
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

124
95
131.6
127.0
64.0

111
94
119.0
112.8
62.5

115
94
122.2
117.0
62.4

124
99
125.0
126.1
58.5

150
106
141.7
154.1
56.3

207
106
194.7
216.3
53.4

243
109
223.7
255.9

227
110
207.1
237.9

210
109
193.0
219.2

195
108
180.0
202.7

  Real interest rates
  Consumer price index  (% change)
  GDP deflator (% change)

10.0
21.7

10.7
0.8

6.8
6.3

11.9
10.5

12.0
11.4

14.6
11.8

15.7
15.9

11.8
10.4

11.7
10.3

12.0
10.6

a.   GDP at market prices
b.  GNFS denotes Goods and Nonfactor Services.
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d.  Includes use of IMF resources.
e.   Central government finances excluding subnational governments.  FY08 and FY09 figures averaged across the two years.
f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

 
Yemen, Rep. - Key Exposure Indicators

CAS Annex B7 

Actual 
2002

2003

2004

Estimate
2005

2006

4973

5301

5335

5218

4959

Projected
2007 
2008 
5053 
5129 

2009

5208

35

243

77.2
23.4
3.6
88.0

146

242

67.7
30.5
3.3
87.9

82 
275 

74.6 
28.6 
4.1 
88.1 

63
270 

82.6 
26.7 
4.3 
88.0 

1873

1919 

1979 

2056

Indicator

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m) a 
Net disbursements (US$m) a 
Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m) a 

Debt and debt service indicators 
(%) 
   TDO/XGS b 
   TDO/GDP 
   TDS/XGS 
   Concessional/TDO 
IBRD exposure indicators (%) 
   Preferred creditor DS/public 
   DS (%) c 
   IDA TDO (US$m) d 

2001 
4870 

-167 
219 

141.7 
51.1 
6.4 
85.9 

62.4 
1237 

53

146

126

143

96

162

129.8
50.5
3.8
88.8

65.3

1384

126.7
44.2
3.4
87.3

61.6

1568

107.4
39.4
3.3
88.2

66.8

1701

89

227

75.5
34.0
3.3
88.1

52.5

1803

a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, use of IMF credits and net short-
     term capital. 
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c.  Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
    Bank for International Settlements. 
d.  Includes present value of guarantees. 
e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

YEMEN - CAS Annex B8
Operations Portfolio (IDA)

As Of Date 04/10/2006

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating
Development 
Implementa-
tion Progress Fiscal Year
Objectives

Closed Projects:  116

Active Projects

Project ID Project Name

P070092
Taiz Municipal Dev & Flood Protection
P043255
Basic Education Expansion Project
P076183
Higher Education
P057602
Urban Water Supply & Sanitation [APL]
P085231
Second Rural Access
P076185
Basic Education Development Program
P050706
Civil Service Modern
P086886
Fisheries Res. Mngmnt & Conservation
P074413
Groundwater & Soil Conservation
P043254
Health Reform Support Project (HRSP)
P062714
Irrigation Improvement
P065111
Port Cities Development Program
P070391
Rural Access Improvement Program
P005906
Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
P064981
Sana'a Basin Water Mgmnt Project
P082498
Social Fund For Development III
P005902
Southern Gov Agric. Privatization
P082976
Third Public Works
Overall Result

HS
S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
S
MU
S
S
S
S
S
S
MS
S

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/
Orig. Frm Rev'd

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

45.2
56
5
130
40
65
30
25
40
27.53
21.3
23.4
45
20
24
60
24.7
45
727.13

19.27
14.13
4.88
112.13
38.24
62.66
14.92
24.93
35.58
27.95
12.94
19.93
8.30
11.62
21.48
40.01
0.28
31.82
501.10

13.71
5.58
3.38
56.04
0.50
3.97
12.73

12.58
10.29
10.73
12.30
1.34
8.98
5.55
19.40
4.64
1.48
183.20

4.74

4.01

8.75

3.21
-6.28

-0.17

6.25
2.07
-0.44

4.64

S
S
MS
MS
S
S
MS
S
S
MU
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

2002
2001
2002
2003
2006
2005
2000
2006
2004
2002
2001
2003
2001
2001
2003
2004
1998
2004

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (Active)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
          of which has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

 261.25
 0.00
 1,569.44
 213.13
 1,830.69
 213.13

 501.10
 6.67
 507.77

a/  Intended disbursements to-date, minus actual disbursements to-date as projected at appraisal.

Note:  The ratings of Project Implementation Progress (IP) and Development Objectives (DO) are classified as 
follows: HS = Highly Satisfactory, S = Satisfactory, MS = Moderately Satisfactory, U = Unsatisfactory, MU = 
Moderate unsatisfactory, and HU = Highly Unsatisfactory.

 
 
 
CAS Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Republic of Yemen:  CAS Annex B8

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 12/31/2005
(In US Dollar Millions)

FY Approval

Company

1999

2002

1998

ACSM

Ahlia Water

Radfan

Total Portfolio:

Loan

6.86

1.36

0.31

8.53

Held

Equity

Quasi

Partic

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Loan

6.86

1.36

0.31

8.53

Disbursed

Equity

Quasi

Partic

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
