d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank Group 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

     Report No. 73265-IQ 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF IRAQ 

FOR THE PERIOD FY13-FY16 

November 13, 2012 

MNC02 Country Management Unit 
Middle East and North Africa Region 

Strategy Unit 
Middle East and North Africa Region 
International Finance Corporation 

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official 
duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The date of the last Interim Strategy Note was February 19, 2009 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS  
US$1 = IQD 1250 (as of June 15, 2012)  

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA Analytical and Advisory Activities 
AFD Agence Francaise de Developpement  
(French Development Agency) 
AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
BSA Board of Supreme Audit 
CAS Country Assistance Strategy 
CDD Community Driven Development 
CPPR Country Portfolio Performance Review 
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy 
CSO Civil Society Organization 
DFI 
Development Fund for Iraq 
DFID Department for International Development 
EC 
European Commission 
EITI 
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 
ESW Economic and Sector Work 
EU 
European Union 
FMA Fiduciary Monitoring Agent 
FY 
Fiscal Year 
GCC Gulf Cooperation Council 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GGFR Global Gas Flaring Reduction 
GOI Government of Iraq 
HIV Human Immune Deficiency Virus 
IBRD 
Int’l Bank for Reconstruction & Development 
ICA 
Investment Climate Assessment 
ICT 
Information and Communication Technologies 
IDA 
International Development Association 
IDPs 
Internally Displaced Persons 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IFMIS Integrated Financial Management Information System 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
INES 
Iraq National Energy Strategy 
ITF 
Iraq Trust Fund 

JICA 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JPOC 
Joint Portfolio Oversight Committee 
JSDF 
Japan Social Development Fund 
KRG 
Kurdistan Regional Government 
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation 
Mbd Million barrels per day 
MENA Middle East and North Africa 
MDGs Millennium Development Goals 
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NBP 
National Board of Pensions 
NDP 
National Development Plan 
PDS 
Public Distribution System 
PEFA 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
PER 
Public Expenditure Review 
PFM 
Public Financial Management 
PPP 
Public-Private Partnerships 
PRS 
Poverty Reduction Strategy 
SABER System Approach for Better Education Results 
SBA 
Stand-by Arrangement 
SIDA 
Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency 
SMEs 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
SOEs 
State-Owned Enterprises 
SPBF 
State and Peace-Building Fund 
SSN 
Social Safety Net 
TA 
Technical Assistance 
UGSC University Governance Score Card 
UN 
United Nations 
UNAMI United Nations Assistant Mission for Iraq 
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
WBG World Bank Group 
WfD Workforce Development 
WDR World Development Report 

Vice President 
Director 
Special Representative 
Task Team Leader 

IBRD 
Inger Andersen 
Ferid Belhaj  
Marie-Hélène Bricknell 
Janet Dooley  

IFC 
MIGA 
Dimitris Tsitsiragos Michel Wormser 
Mouayed Makhlouf 
Ravi Vish 

Ziad Badr 

Persephone Economou 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was prepared by a team led by Janet Dooley and previously 
Barbry Keller, under the guidance of Hedi Larbi, previous Country Director and Ferid Belhaj, current 
Country Director, and Marie-Hélène Bricknell, Special Representative for Iraq.  Core team members 
include Pilar Maisterra, Mary Eunice Barroso, Kevin Carey, Sibel Kulaksiz, Ousman Jah, Sabah 
Moussa, May Ibrahim, and Anne Njuguna.  Jorge Araujo, Anwar Aridi, Marian Saleh, Sana Al-Nimer, 
Arun Arya, Ibrahim Dajani, Fabrice Mosneron Dupin, Caroline Van Den Berg, Stephen Rimmer, 
Hooman Dabidian, Maged Hamed, Lianqin Wang, Ghassan Alkhoja, Sahar Nasr, Bertine Kamphius, 
Elisabeth Huybens, Alexandre Marc, Stephen Ndegwa, Simon Stolp, Carolyn Winter, Sarah Nedolast, 
Sebnem Akkaya, Veronique Kessler, Abdelmoula Ghzala, Abdulhamid Azad, Caroline Freund, Dale 
Lautenbach, Ferhat Esen, Gloria La Cava, Guenter Heidenhof, Husam Mohamed Beides, Jad Mazareh, 
Rajendra Singh, Jonathan Walters, Marc Jean Yves Lixi, Nikolai Soubbotin, Paul Prettitore, Victoria 
Gyllerup, Simon Bell, Suiko Yoshijima, Tara Vishwanath, Tamer Rabie, Tarig Mohamed Osman, 
Virginia Jackson, Shaymaa Hassan, and other country team members contributed to this strategy.  For 
the IFC, the team includes: Ahmed Attiga, Ziad Badr, and Rapti Goonesekere. The MIGA team members 
are Persephone Economou and Paul Barbour.  

In addition, the team would like to thank the Government especially our counterparts in the Ministry of 
Finance, including Dr. Fadhil Othman, Deputy Minister of Finance, and Dr. Salah Hadithi for 
coordinating and hosting the CPS workshop with the Government, and KRG Ministry of Planning, as 
well as the representatives of the various line ministries, and the Iraq Executive Director’s office of the 
World Bank.  In addition to the Iraqi authorities, the team thanks the various stakeholders, civil society 
organizations including NGOs, trade unions, think-tanks and media organizations, as well as 
international partners met throughout Iraq who gave their time, insights and valuable input to inform this 
strategy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FY13-16 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR 
IRAQ 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................... i 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ............................................. 1 
Political and Security Developments ........................................................................................ 1 
Social and Poverty Trends ........................................................................................................ 2 
Economic and Governance Context .......................................................................................... 3 
Iraq Medium-Term Prospects ................................................................................................... 4 
Key Development Challenges ................................................................................................... 7 
Government Priorities ............................................................................................................. 14 

III. BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ................................................................. 15 

A. Lessons Learned from Previous Engagement and Stakeholder Feedback .............................. 15 

B. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy ................................................................ 19 
Result Area 1: Improving Governance ................................................................................... 22 
Result Area 2: Supporting Economic Diversification for Broadly Shared Prosperity ........... 23 
Result Area 3: Improving Social Inclusion and Reducing Poverty ........................................ 25 

C. Implementing the FY13-16 Country Partnership Strategy ..................................................... 27 
Financing of the Program........................................................................................................ 28 
Fostering Stronger Partnerships .............................................................................................. 28 
Strategic Communications ...................................................................................................... 29 

IV. MANAGING RISKS ............................................................................................................ 29 

TABLES: 
Table 1: Iraq Medium-Term Outlook……………………………….……………………………….…6 
Table 2: Indicative Assistance Program…………………………….………………………………...21 

FIGURES: 
Figure 1: Civilian Casualties, January 2003-January 2011…………………………………………….1 
Figure 2: Selected Economic Indicators………………………………………………………………..5 
Figure 3: Rule of Law Measures (Iraq vs. MENA Compared)…………………………………………8 
Figure 4: Unemployment Rate by Gender and Other Indicators……………………………………….9 
Figure 5: Leading Constraints to Firms Operating in Iraq…………………………………………….10 
Figure 6: Literacy Rate of Segment of Population Aged 15-24 Years………………………………...13 
Figure 7: Active Portfolio………………………………………………………………………...…..17 

BOXES: 
Box 1: Portfolio and Supervision Arrangements……………………………………………………...16 
Box 2: Observations from a Gender Review of the Iraq portfolio……………………………………18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES: 
Country Specific Annexes: 
Annex 1:  Iraq CPS Results Framework (FY13-16)…………………………………...………….....31 
Annex 2:  Key Ongoing Technical Assistance Supporting National Strategies……………………...36 
Annex 3:  Consultations Report………………………………………………………………...…....37 
Annex 4:  Iraq Matrix of Donor Interventions………………………………………...………..……40 
Annex 5:  Iraq’s Progress towards the MDGs………………………………………………….…….41 

Standard CAS Annexes:   
Annex A2:  Iraq at a Glance…………………………………………………………………….……43 
Annex B2:  Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management…………….……46 
Annex B5:  Iraq Social Indicators……………………………………………………………….…...47 
Annex B6:  Iraq Key Economic Indicators…………………………………………………………..48 
Annex B7:  Key Exposure Indicators………………………………………….……………………..50 
Annex B8:  World Bank Portfolio……………………………….….……………….........................51 
Annex B8:  IFC Portfolio…………………………………………….………....……………………52 
Annex B8:  MIGA’s Outstanding Exposure……………………….………………………………...53 

MAP IBRD 33422R………………………………………………………………………………….54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Partnership Strategy for Iraq 2013-2016 

I. 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

i. 
Iraq is at a crossroads.  While past years saw a country in transition, with sectarian violence 
particularly from 2005-2008, and strong presence of foreign intervention, the situation in Iraq is 
changing, and Iraqi-led political processes are maturing.  The last United States (US) troops withdrew 
in December 2011, marking the end of eight years of the US-led military presence in Iraq.  The 
international donor community, which has been heavily involved in Iraq over the past years, is 
incrementally withdrawing or shifting from grant-based reconstruction efforts to loans and 
partnerships.  Two elections have been held since 2003, providing for further maturity in national 
political processes.  The latest elections were held in 2010, resulting in a delicately balanced 
governing coalition.  The Government has been organizing itself to develop and agree on complex 
national compacts at a country and sectoral level: on sharing the country’s national resources through 
the proposed hydrocarbons law; and designing and implementing strategies in key areas such as 
energy, education, and pensions.  Iraq has returned as an active member of the international 
community, forging long-term engagements with international organizations and re-connecting with 
the region at large, reflected, for example, by hosting the 2012 Arab Summit.  

ii. 
On the economic front, Iraq is a richly resource-endowed country; however this presents 
its own challenges. Oil production is projected to continue increasing to reach about six million 
barrels per day by end of this decade.  However, oil dependence makes the country highly susceptible 
to oil price fluctuations, and the hydrocarbons sector does not provide enough jobs for Iraq’s large 
population.  In addition, given institutional capacity limitations, Iraq faces great difficulties in 
effectively using the vast revenues generated by oil and in effectively delivering services to the 
population.  While Iraq has achieved growth and reduced inflation in recent years, issues remain with 
medium-term budget planning and expenditure, corruption, inequality, political disruption, and other 
vulnerabilities which hold back its progress.  Iraq is also attempting to recover from the setbacks of 
years of conflict and civil strife.  Progress in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) 
is slow, and there have been reversals on some indicators.  The development challenge for Iraq is to 
build up its capacity to properly use its own substantial resources for the benefit of current and future 
generations and to diversify its economy away from over-reliance on oil.  The challenge is also to 
move from a country-centric development agenda to a more open and competitive stance, including 
regional and broad international integration through trade, commerce and new technologies. 

iii. 
In 2010, the Government prepared the National Development Plan (NDP) 2010-2014, a 
medium-term development strategy aimed at providing a framework for the country's 
sustainable development.  This strategy is complemented by a Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 
done in January 2009, developed with World Bank support.  The NDP's economic pillar aims to 
achieve Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth of 9.4 percent per annum; to generate 3 to 4.5 million 
new jobs; to diversify the economy away from oil and into agriculture, industrial sectors, and tourism; 
and to create a stronger role for the private sector, both in terms of investment and job opportunities.  
The strategy aims to reduce poverty rates by 30 percent from 2007 levels by focusing on 
comprehensive rural development and providing basic services such as education and healthcare, 
particularly for vulnerable groups such as youth and women.  The NDP focuses on environmentally- 
sensitive economic and social development using available natural resources in a sustainable way.  It 
also aims to strengthen the role of local governments to bring service delivery and economic 
development closer to the people.  The NDP is in the process of being updated to cover the period 
2013-2017.   

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iv. 
This first World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Iraq aims to 
support Government efforts to implement the NDP, building on stakeholder feedback and 
lessons learned.  It also reflects the Bank and IFC’s regional framework and strategy for the Middle 
East and North Africa (MENA) Region which has evolved to respond to the events of the Arab Spring 
and focuses on governance, sustainable private sector-led growth, job creation and economic and 
social inclusion.  This CPS marks a turning point in the Bank’s engagement with Iraq.  Following 
three interim strategy notes, this CPS moves away from transition to embrace a deeper and longer-term 
engagement with a view to informing important policy choices that will lay the foundation for Iraq’s 
future.  The CPS is built on a thorough dialogue with the Government and stakeholders, including 
civil society, academia and the private sector.  The Bank’s previous strategies focused on supporting 
Iraq’s reconstruction efforts, building capacity of state institutions and laying the foundation for 
long-term growth.  The Bank’s program included significant analytical work, technical assistance and 
training, and investments across a range of sectors including infrastructure, health, education and 
social protection, as well as a Development Policy Loan supporting budget management, the financial 
sector and the social protection system.  Project support was financed through about US$500 million 
from the multi-donor Iraq Trust Fund (ITF) and a one-time allocation of US$500 million from the 
International Development Association (IDA).  The lessons learned from the Bank Group’s 
engagement over the past several years will inform this CPS, in particular the need to adapt to realities 
on the ground and the need for strong Government ownership. 

v. 
The Bank Group is shifting to a new modality of engagement with Iraq.  The Bank’s 
nearly US$1 billion reconstruction and recovery portfolio will come to an end during the CPS period.  
The Bank Group’s new program will seek to help Iraq leverage its own vast public resources and build 
effective public and private institutions needed to create jobs and deliver services.  The Bank will also 
start helping Iraq leverage its strategic regional positioning and human capital potential to build the 
tenets of its participation in and integration into its immediate region and beyond.  This will require 
the Bank Group to bring knowledge and best practices to help find practical solutions and to move 
from a transaction-based engagement to strategic support for institutional development.  Catalytic 
investments financed by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 
analytical and advisory activities (AAA), International Finance Corporation (IFC) advisory and 
investment engagement, guarantees from the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and 
reimbursable services will form the backbone of this CPS. 

vi. 
To support the country’s efforts to build stronger government institutions and a more 
diversified economy that can deliver services to the population and create jobs, the CPS is 
structured to pivot around three axes: (i) Improving Governance; (ii) Supporting Economic 
Diversification for Broadly-Shared Prosperity; and (iii) Improving Social Inclusion and Reducing 
Poverty.  The key focus areas which shaped existing programs (i.e. public financial management, 
strengthening institutions, private sector development, infrastructure, and service delivery) remain 
relevant in this context.  Gender is an important cross-cutting theme. On governance, the Bank Group 
will seek to understand sector-wide governance challenges, and support improved fiscal management, 
public procurement, government auditing, and civil service performance; expanded demand-side 
accountability, particularly for beneficiaries of public services; setting and enforcing high standards 
for managing Bank resources; and building coalitions for addressing governance and anti-corruption 
challenges at the country level.  Unleashing Iraq’s growth potential in the non-oil sector will involve 
efforts to improve the business environment; expand core infrastructure, especially in roads (with a 
view to deepening regional integration and increasing market size), water and electricity; enhance 
agricultural productivity, with a focus on food security; and strengthen public sector management and 
sub-national governance.  In addition, the Bank Group will seek to help the Government improve the 
management of water resources and to address climate-change given Iraq’s high vulnerability. 

ii 

 
 
 
 
Reducing inequality and social exclusion will involve increasing the access of the poor—and in 
particular women—to basic education, health services and water and sanitation, and improving social 
safety nets.   

vii. 
A proposed program is outlined in the CPS to support this agenda.  Analytical and 
advisory activities include, inter alia, follow-up work to a Public Expenditure Review and a Report on 
Oil Revenue Management for Economic Diversification, a Poverty and Gender Assessment, 
Agriculture Technical Assistance, a Gas Master System Study, and Financial Sector Dialogue.  IBRD 
projects amounting to US$540 million have been identified starting in FY14 for five operations 
including Integrated Financial Management Information Systems; Governance; Trade and Transport 
Corridors; Irrigation and Water Resources and Water Supply and Sewerage.  In addition, a program of 
Reimbursable Services is being developed.   

viii. 
Implementing the Program.  Iraq’s realities call for a CPS that is flexible in design and 
implementation arrangements and adaptable to evolving circumstances.  The Bank will adjust its 
program depending on opportunities and progress in the results areas.  The indicative lending 
envelope is US$600-900 million during the CPS period.  IFC will continue investing in the private 
sector with an indicative program of US$100-150 million per year (assuming continued improvement 
in the business environment), and will ramp up its advisory services in the country.  MIGA will 
continue to support Iraq’s efforts to attract foreign private investors through the provision of political 
risk guarantees.  The Bank Group will continue to work closely with other development partners in 
the context of the International Partners’ Forum, as well as with civil society, the media and other 
stakeholders.  Strategic communications will seek to provide information to stakeholders and to 
provoke constructive and informed debate.  

ix. Managing Risks.  There are several risks to the Bank Group’s program in Iraq, including a 
politically fluid situation, vested interests, regional instability, in-country violence and insecurity as 
well as economic volatility related to the fluctuation of oil prices.  This CPS aims to be candid about 
identified risks and their impact - direct or indirect - on its implementation.  The most important risk 
pertains to the political and security situations which remain fragile.  Gaps in capacity or commitment 
of the Government to implement reform or reversal of policies, particularly near the next elections, 
may also undermine the success of the Bank’s program.  Other risks include vulnerability to external 
shocks and terrorism.  Project implementation risks include weaknesses in project and contract 
management, fiduciary and safeguards management.  The Bank Group intends to be realistic in what 
it can accomplish and to adapt the program as needed.  The Bank will continue to make policy 
recommendations and support prudent macroeconomic management by the Government, which is the 
key to providing the fiscal space for the Government to adjust appropriately to fiscal shocks when they 
occur and will continue to find ways to carry out supervision of the ongoing portfolio despite a difficult 
security environment.  In the event that the operating environment deteriorates in Iraq, IFC will focus 
on portfolio management and engaging selectively through its advisory arm. 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

Political and Security Developments 
1. 
After years of uncertainty, conflict and instability, the Iraqi state, while still fragile, has 
been consolidating.  Following a gradual slow-down of violence and insecurity during the period 
2006-08, parliamentary elections in 2010 resulted in a coalition government presided over by Nouri 
Al-Maliki of the Al-Dawa party (Shi’a) and including Ministers from the Al-Iraqiya (secular), the 
Saadrist (Shi’a), and the Kurdish blocs.  However, sectarian and political divisions continue.  More 
recently, tensions between the Al-Dawa party and Al-Iraqiya have threatened the stability of the 
governing coalition.  Attempts to bring all parties to the table through a national conference have failed 
to materialize thus far, creating an atmosphere of political instability.  In recent weeks there has been a 
lowering of tensions between the Kurds and the central authorities over the exploration of oil. This will 
hopefully open the way for negotiations to resume over a national oil law.  At the same time, legislative 
processes in Iraq are maturing, and the delicately-balanced governing coalition has been organizing itself 
to develop and agree on country and sector level strategies.   

2. 
Security has improved overall, but the situation is volatile.  Iraq has made significant 
progress in improving security with violent incidents declining from a high of 2,700 per month in 2008 to 
263 as of March 2012 (Figure 1).  The US fully withdrew its troops in December 2011, and although the 
security situation is now greatly improved since the mid-2000s, incidents continue sporadically, 
especially around religious or political events with some large-scale attacks against security and civilian 
targets.  Ramadan 2012 saw a spike in violence with over 400 Iraqis reported killed.  The political 
situation remains volatile and unpredictable, affecting the Government’s ability to manage security and 
focus on development issues.  At the same time, Iraq remains vulnerable to regional instability.  The 
Syrian crisis, which is spilling over to Iraq as other neighboring countries, is adding to an already difficult 
situation.   

3. 
Centralization of power and corruption threaten the legitimacy of the state.  Iraq’s 
constitution calls for a federal state, but power is concentrated in Baghdad with oil wealth concentrated 
primarily in areas such as the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), Kirkuk, and Basra.  Only KRG 
enjoys increased autonomy, prompting other regions, such as the Sunni Diyala and Salahaddin Provinces 
to also demand some level of autonomy and self-governing as stipulated by the Constitution.  The 
breakdown of society during the Iraq war along sectarian and ethnic lines has further weakened Iraq’s 
unity.  Governance challenges also threaten the legitimacy of the state.  The three pillars of state 
oversight mandated by the constitution, the Commission of Integrity, the Board of Supreme Audit and the 
Council of Representatives, are hampered in delivering on their mandates and the judicial system is not 
yet able to prosecute corruption cases.  

Figure 1:  Civilian Casualties, January 2003 – January 2011 1 

40000
30000
20000
10000
0

1 Source:  Iraqbodycount.org 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
4. 
Differences over distribution of power and coalition partners have dominated Iraqi politics, 
distracting attention from the immediate task of rebuilding the country and laying the ground for 
economic development.  If these differences continue, political tensions are likely to rise until the next 
election, worsening economic management, delaying governance improvements impeding the delivery of 
services to the population, and potentially aggravating the fragile security situation.   

Social and Poverty Trends  
5. 
Despite its vast oil wealth, Iraq’s standard of living has declined over the past 25 years.  
Gross domestic product (GDP) per person declined by a third between 1980 and 2006, from about 
US$3,000 to about US$2,000 as a result of conflict and war.  Social trends have paralleled economic 
trends:  for example, primary school enrollment, an area where Iraq traditionally led in the region, has 
declined over the past 25 years. 

6. 
Poverty is widespread but shallow, particularly affecting vulnerable groups such as widows 
and the displaced.  The 2010 Poverty Assessment showed that overall poverty is 23 percent.  About 6.9 
million Iraqis are classified as poor, half in rural areas and half in urban areas.  Iraq’s poverty gap index 
(i.e. average distance from the poverty line) of 4.5 percent is also extremely low compared to most other 
countries.  Iraq’s comparative absence of absolute poverty is largely a result of the impact of universal 
food rations under the Public Distribution System (PDS), but this does not capture the deterioration of 
livelihoods for ordinary Iraqis.  The poor lack access to employment –– two-thirds work in the informal 
sector, most in non-wage agriculture (27 percent) or as employees in small unregulated enterprises (24 
percent).  The poor also suffer from shortages of housing and basic services – 89 percent live in crowded 
housing with very poor electricity service.  Schools are in poor condition with low enrollment rates, 
especially for poor girls. 2  The country’s current national poverty target is to reduce poverty from 23 
percent (2007) to 16 percent (2015).  The poverty line will be revalidated by the 2012 household survey 
currently underway, which may affect the target.  

7. 
Rapid population growth, urbanization and demographic transition will shape Iraq’s 
development prospects for the next decades.  Years of war and sectarian strife have led to a rural to 
urban shift in Iraq as Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) increasingly opt to stay in areas where they feel 
more secure.  This has led to a growing expansion of the urban population which cities like Baghdad are 
ill-equipped to accommodate.  The pressure on housing and basic services, including water and 
sanitation, is a growing social problem.  The urban transport, water and sanitation infrastructure for 
Baghdad was planned for 600,000 inhabitants, but today Baghdad hosts a population of about five to six 
million. 

8. 
Iraq has a very low employment rate (only 38 percent of adult Iraqis are employed), and 
women face particular challenges in terms of economic opportunities.  The public sector employs 32 
percent of all working Iraqi adults, and the job-creating capacity of the hydrocarbons sector is very 
limited.  The female labor force participation rate is only about eleven percent.  Female unemployment 
is at 20 percent versus male unemployment at 14 percent (2008).  According to the 2007 Household 
Socio-Economic Survey (which formed the basis of the poverty assessment in the Poverty Reduction 
Strategy), the relatively few women who participate in the labor force are heavily concentrated either in 
public sector wage jobs, notably education (non-poor, educated, primarily urban women) or at the 
opposite end of the spectrum in non-wage agricultural jobs (poor, less-educated, mostly rural women).  
The situation of widows in Iraq is acute.  There are between one to three million estimated 3 
female-headed households in Iraq as a result of decades of war and violence.  The Iraqi Government has 

2 United Nations (UN)/Government of Iraq, The UN Millennium Development Goals (2010).  
3 International Committee for the Red Cross 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
developed a social welfare program intended to help widows financially, but the allowance is deemed 
insufficient and many do not receive it. 

9. 
In keeping with regional trends, youth unemployment is particularly high.  Young people, 
aged 18–30, are Iraq’s largest demographic group but they have few economic opportunities.  Youth 
unemployment remains high for both women and men:  30 percent for women and men aged 20-24 
(2008), a significant increase from 1990 when youth unemployment was around 7 percent for both young 
men and women.  Youth, particularly from rural areas, are trapped within communities where the quality 
of public education is poor, organized recreational opportunities are non-existent, and the unemployment 
rate for 16–25 year-olds exceeds 35 percent.  Idleness and a lack of information and effective awareness 
campaigns for youth also add to their exclusion from political and economic opportunities. 

10. 
Returnees and IDPs are a significantly marginalized group.  As of September 2011, 1.3 
million4 Iraqis were internally displaced.  Many IDPs live in deplorable conditions and are deprived of 
essential assistance, with their need for humanitarian support increasing the longer their displacement 
continues.  Within Iraq, there are now an additional 50,000 refugees from Syria with an estimated 500 
streaming across the border—largely into northern Iraq—on a weekly basis. 5  Iraqi returnees face many 
challenges, including lack of security, livelihood prospects, and social services.  

Economic and Governance Context 

11. 
Amid the challenging political and security environment, Iraq has achieved considerable 
progress toward macroeconomic stability since 2003.  Due to sound monetary policy and increasing 
oil production, Iraq achieved single-digit inflation, economic growth resumed, and the fiscal and current 
account balances have strengthened (after deteriorating in the wake of the global financial crisis).  Iraq’s 
debt-to-GDP ratio has been on a downward trajectory due to debt restructuring with the Paris Club and 
rapid GDP growth.  The macro stabilization program has been supported by the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) through a Stand-By Arrangement (SBA), while the World Bank’s Fiscal Sustainability 
Development Policy Loan, approved in February 2010, supported structural reforms in budget 
management, the social protection system and the financial sector. 

12. 
Once macroeconomic stabilization was achieved, oil market conditions have become the 
dominant determinant of growth.  The immediate aftermath of war saw a sharp decline in growth and 
a spike in inflation (Figure 2).  Inflation was brought down to single digits through an exchange rate peg 
and a gradual improvement in the economy’s supply response.  Crude oil production and exports have 
steadily increased in recent years, with production rising from less than two million barrels per day (mbd) 
in 2004 to an estimated 2.7 mbd in 2011; exports were about 2.1 mbd in 2011.  At the same time, prices 
for Iraqi crude oil, after dipping in 2009 in the wake of the global financial crisis, increased to US$104 per 
barrel in 2011. 

13. 
Budget surpluses have been underpinned by elevated oil prices, but the budget remains 
vulnerable to shocks.  While the 2011 surplus was nearly eight percent of GDP, the authorities 
exceeded the spending bill target by paying salary increases mandated by Parliament and by spending 
more on social services, due primarily to international food price rises which impact the fiscal cost of the 
Public Distribution System (PDS) – Iraq’s virtually universal food price subsidy scheme.  The IMF SBA 
has helped provide support to sound fiscal management.  While viewed as precautionary by the 
Government, the SBA provides a framework of fiscal discipline for the Bank’s policy dialogue.  The 
2012 budget adopted by Parliament is broadly in line with IMF recommendations, and fiscal policy has 

4 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates 
5 UNHCR, October 25, 2012 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
remained on track.  Increasing off-budget domestic debt in 2010-2012 presents a potential vulnerability. 

14. 
The heavy dependence on oil has two key implications for fiscal policy and institutions.  
First, it subjects revenue and therefore expenditure to volatility of international oil prices.  Second, 
dependence on oil receipts (and negligible contribution of tax revenues) to fund the budget means that the 
authorities face little incentive to build strong budgetary institutions and transparency, due in part to 
limited demand for accountability to the population.  Medium-term fiscal planning is rudimentary and 
lacks credibility with the public.  Fiscal forecasting is made primarily on the basis of projected oil export 
volumes and prices rather than robust macroeconomic and fiscal analysis. 

15. 
The overhang of Saddam-era debts has been reduced but not eliminated.  In November 
2004, the Paris Club countries agreed to reduce the country’s Paris Club debts by 80 percent in three 
phases provided Iraq met a specific set of conditions.  Some Paris Club creditors also agreed to additional 
bilateral relief efforts beyond the 80 percent reduction.  Iraq was able to abide by all of the Paris Club 
conditions, and in 2009, the successful conclusion of the IMF 2007-2009 SBA triggered the release of the 
final tranche of debt relief agreed by the Paris Club.  A number of Iraq’s non-Paris Club creditors have 
also agreed to debt relief comparable to the Paris Club treatment.  Iraq’s commercial debt was also 
successfully restructured with terms comparable to the ones offered by Paris Club creditors.  Overall, the 
external debt to GDP ratio fell from 220 percent in 2006 to 107 percent of GDP in 2010 6.  However, even 
with these significant relief efforts by a number of Iraq’s creditors, further negotiations are needed to 
determine how substantial non-Paris Club debts (notably to the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
countries) will be settled.  

Iraq’s Medium-Term Prospects 
16. 
Iraq’s oil production and export revenues are projected to increase well into the medium 
term.  Real GDP growth is projected to increase by ten percent in 2012 and 14.7 percent in 2013, even if 
the pace of global growth is low.  Growth will be driven by expansion of crude oil production and exports 
and associated investment needs.  However, non-oil sector growth is only about five percent per year, far 
below what would be expected for a reconstructing country.  In 2011, oil sector revenues accounted for 
70 percent of GDP, 91 percent of total revenues, and 99 percent of export revenues.  This strong 
dependence of the economy on the oil sector is projected to persist.  The lack of diversification also 
undermines Iraq’s ability to conduct medium-term fiscal policy since there is no non-oil tax base 
providing more predictable revenue flows. 

17. 
The recurrent budget is dominated by a few major items related to security and basic 
services, while the capital budget suffers from chronic under-execution.  For the recurrent budget, 
nearly 40 percent of employee compensation is on security and defense.  Fuel subsidies, pensions, and 
the food distribution system account for much of recurrent non-wage spending; these policy instruments 
constitute an imperfect social safety net with significant inefficiencies.  For the capital budget, the 
average execution rate is about 60 percent, and the failure to deliver key projects on time contributes to 
frustrations of the public and investors with the Government. 

18. 
Improvements in fiscal stability and transparency have not been followed by the building of 
sound fiscal institutions.  Besides the notable reduction in budget deficits in recent years (down from 22 
percent of GDP in 2009), revenue transparency has improved.  In this regard, the roles played by the 
Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) – now fully under Iraqi management – as well as the Extractive 
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) are important.  However, the current fiscal policy framework 
falls short of the level needed, given Iraq’s circumstances.  This pertains in particular to: (i) reducing the 

6 IMF Second Review of SBA, March 2011 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
costs of oil revenue volatility by de-linking government spending from short-term fluctuations in oil 
export proceeds; (ii) safeguarding the quality of public spending through strengthened public expenditure 
management systems; and (iii) ensuring longer-term fiscal sustainability through provision for income- 
generating assets, whether real or financial. 

Figure 2: Selected Economic Indicators 

19. 
Because of its large youth bulge and the need to provide employment for these young labor 
force entrants, Iraq cannot rely only on its oil wealth.  Economic diversification will be essential for 
job creation.  Because the energy sector is capital intensive, it is generating jobs in the magnitude of tens 
of thousands, whereas the country’s job creation needs run into the millions.  Numerous analyses of 
private investment point to the need for regulatory reforms which will allow for increasing private sector 
involvement in sectors outside the oil industry, providing the vehicle for diversification and jobs.  
Agriculture and religious tourism are identified as potential sources of diversification.  Neither sector 
could be a major national employment driver on its own, but they have tremendous growth potential and 
strong linkages with the service sector, where the bulk of the jobs lie for the Iraqis.  On tourism, millions 
of attendees at the major pilgrimage sites in Karbala and Najaf are reported, and those arriving by land are 
not fully captured in the official statistics.  Thus the total number of visitors is already in the millions, 
even with the current security situation. 

20. 
Productivity-led growth would require a more skilled labor force.  Although the country has 
a legacy as a center of education and culture, there is a significant problem of illiteracy especially among 
women.  Iraq will have difficulty achieving momentum in productivity growth without quality education 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
and expansion in market size and for this, better global and regional integration is essential.  The private 
sector needs to be seen as an integral player in Iraq's development.  Investment opportunities are already 
present in the construction, banking, industry, agriculture, agribusiness and tourism sectors, and the 
private sector has the knowledge and incentives to take advantage of them if the right enablers are present.  
These opportunities will, if realized, provide substantial sources of job creation and diversified growth.  

Table 1: Iraq Medium-Term Outlook 

21. 
Iraq’s difficult political legacy is likely to exacerbate the usual resource curse problems 
associated with oil and gas abundance.  Since oil revenues are seen as collective property, in the 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
absence of well-defined distribution mechanisms, there will be a tendency for everyone to race to get 
“their share.”  This process could easily degenerate into perceptions of unfairness aggravating existing 
tensions.  Furthermore, despite all the emphasis on investment in recent budgets, Iraq faces the prospect 
of preference for investments that can be made regionally specific or in some sense associated, if not 
appropriated, by local interests.  Conversely, the federal layer, especially non-security, could get 
squeezed.  The political economy of the country points to the need for a distribution policy that favors job 
creation for all, equitable access to basic services in all regions, and fair and transparent social safety nets 
which target the most needy and vulnerable groups across community and political spectrum. 

22. 
Under the baseline medium-term outlook, Iraq will have no significant budget or external 
financing needs (Table 1).  This is because oil revenues will be adequate to ensure that the DFI can fund 
the budget, while foreign reserves will easily cover prospective external financing requirements.  Gross 
foreign reserves are likely to reach US$84 billion in 2015, and DFI balances should also substantially 
increase.  However, the baseline is subject to wide uncertainty.  First, the baseline assumes oil export 
prices of around US$100 per barrel, but various factors point to a medium-term weakening of oil market 
prospects, including the emergence of shale gas and the impact of Iraq’s own increased crude oil supply 
on world prices.  Second, fiscal space in the budget is limited, due to the role of politically sensitive items 
like salaries and subsidies coupled with pressing demands on the infrastructure side.  Further, Iraq’s oil 
sector expansion plan involves substantial up-front fiscal commitments.  Third, since oil revenues 
represent asset depletion, they should be integrated with other financing sources even if, in the aggregate, 
all spending needs could be financed from oil.  Indeed, a financing mix would allow Iraq to mitigate the 
longer-term costs of its rush to increase oil production for cash flow reasons, such as gas flaring, water 
re-injection, and damage to oil reservoirs.  The Bank has examined a number of scenarios with oil 
production, exports, and prices.  The scenarios show that there are plausible conditions under which Iraq 
could experience fiscal and current account deficits (e.g. at US$80 per barrel) even with oil production of 
four mbd.  As mentioned, Iraq can likely finance deficits from accumulated revenues, but the scenarios 
help to indicate the speed with which these fiscal buffers could be depleted under adverse external 
conditions.  As inputs for a more stable fiscal situation, Iraq will need to adopt a fiscal policy that: (1) 
aligns with its implementation capacity; (2) respects the fundamental balancing of macro aggregates; (3) 
develops the extensive gas resources along with recovering flared gas; and (4) diversifies its economy. 

Key Development Challenges 
Governance 

23. 
Iraq fares low in global governance benchmarking.  Transparency International ranks Iraq at 
175 out of 182 countries on its 2011 corruption index, a slight improvement over previous rankings.  This 
ranking places Iraq just above countries like Somalia, North Korea, Afghanistan and Sudan.  Beyond a 
history of war and sanctions, endemic corruption is one of the main factors contributing to state weakness. 

24. 
Institutional capacity and governance weaknesses are at the root of many of Iraq’s 
development challenges.  Corruption is widespread, transparency and accountability are weak, and the 
rule of law is poorly applied.  Citizen engagement in oversight is weak.  These weaknesses affect the 
delivery of public services; access is uneven for individuals and businesses as is the playing field for 
private sector provision.  Implementation of the rule of law is also poor.  Recent integrity indicators 
place Iraq among the weakest in a comparison of 50 diverse countries (Figure 3).  Yet a number of public 
surveys show that the judiciary itself is seen as mostly non-sectarian and minimally corrupt compared to 
other public sector institutions. 

25. 
The quality of public financial management (PFM) transactions and procedures has 
improved.  Budget credibility (matching of outturns with projections) has shown some quantifiable 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
improvements, and reforms have resulted in the ability to track arrears.  Comprehensiveness and 
transparency have improved through enhancements to fiscal reporting between national and sub-national 
governments.  Budget execution systems show mixed results with relative improvements in procurement 
transactions offset by deteriorations in payroll controls.  Accounting, recording and reporting systems 
now have stronger processes for reconciliation of accounts and in-year and annual reporting.  External 
scrutiny and audit have improved due to more timely external audits.  

26. 
Notwithstanding the above improvements, certain PFM practices worsened over the past 
few years, and procurement is an area of major weakness.  Weak PFM practices include off-budget 
spending, worsening fiscal reporting, slow progress on Integrated Financial Management Information 
System (IFMIS) implementation, and poor investment budget execution rates.  Low budget execution is 
largely attributed to poor planning and preparation of instruments and inadequate control over investment 
project related cash releases, leading to low level of utilization and large budget surpluses.  Public 
procurement has also been a significant source of governance concerns and is burdened by outdated and 
contradictory rules.  Some progress has been made on developing standard bidding documents, a 
national implementation manual and a training strategy.  A new procurement law based on international 
best practices was drafted, but has not been adopted.  In addition, occurrences of bribery and collusion 
among bidders in public contracting have put an immense strain on public finances.  Going forward, 
improving the efficiency and effectiveness of public spending would entail continued focus on budget 
preparation and implementation, strengthening audit capacity, passing and implementing a new 
procurement law, and transparency in reporting public accounting. 

Figure 3: Rule of Law Measures (Iraq vs. Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Compared) 

27. 
Building transparency and accountability in Iraq’s public sector will be critical to 
improving quality, efficiency and equity in public service delivery and limiting opportunities for 
corruption.  A number of public episodes of corruption over the past few years illustrate the difficulties 
that elite capture presents in Iraq.  Iraq also faces risks of money laundering.  Ensuring a level playing 
field with equal access to public services for all citizens and firms as well as accountability measures such 
as freedom of information with a pro-active public disclosure policy would assist in combating these 
problems.  Strengthening the state-citizen compact and improving government effectiveness will require 
developing avenues for the systematic involvement of civil society and private sector groups in the design 
and implementation of government programs.  This will help to build consensus about important policy 
reforms and to focus attention on the issues and concerns raised by citizens.   

Private Sector Development and Growth 

28. 
A vibrant private sector is critical to provide jobs for Iraq’s large population.  Decades of 
state-driven economic policy have tightly bound Iraq’s economy to the needs of the State. Consequently, 
the private sector today has little role or presence, and incentives for its expansion are nearly absent.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Because of the State’s long-term dominance, credit systems and access to finance are severely limited.  
Iraq’s conflicts have generated problems such as a marked exodus of educated, skilled Iraqis, a sustained 
isolation from global networks of information and trade, and significant destruction and degradation of 
infrastructure.  Job creation remains one of Iraq’s largest development challenges. International 
experience suggests that employment generation by a large public sector is unsustainable and that 
long-term job growth instead requires the development of an attractive investment climate and a 
predictable and low cost of doing business, so that a robust and productive private sector can generate 
employment and rising standards of living.  Oil accounts for more than half of GDP but for less than one 
percent of total employment.   

29. 
However, the private sector is poorly positioned to play its role as a creator of jobs. In 
addition to problems of security, it is plagued by lack of access to credit, high entry and exit barriers and a 
slow, ambiguous legal and regulatory system.  Like households, businesses suffer from unreliable 
delivery of essential services, including telecommunications, transport, sewerage, water, and electricity. 
Although the potential for private sector engagement in post-conflict Iraq is significant, the country’s 
private sector is both under-developed and fragmented.  Most private businesses in Iraq are very small 
and mainly operate in retail and trade, construction and transportation services, as well as in light industry 
in the textile, food, engineering, and chemical fields. The great majority of businesses are owned by sole 
proprietors, with most of the remainder being family partnerships 7.  Many of the employees in small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) are unskilled, short-term laborers.  Iraq only possesses a handful of large, 
typically family-run multi-industry conglomerates, active in retail, domestic trade, telecommunications, 
and construction, but not in traded goods and services. 

30. 
Iraq also suffers from particularly significant gender 
inequality 
in 
labor force 
participation, educational attainment and training.  This suggests that Iraq can make better use of its 
human resources by more fully utilizing the talents and abilities of its female population.  Only 13 
percent of Iraqi women are in the labor force 8, far lower than virtually all of Iraq’s neighbors.  Only 
seven percent of sampled firms from an enterprise survey data for the Bank’s Investment Climate 
Assessment (ICA) reported that a woman was one of its principal owners, lower than in any MENA 
countries to date.  Similarly, Iraq has a very low rate of females in management when compared to other 
MENA countries.  One percent of firms in Iraq have female managers, compared to Syria and Lebanon 
with 23 percent and 29 percent females in management, respectively. 

Figure 4: Unemployment Rate by Gender and Other Indicators9 

7 UN/International Labour Organization (ILO) survey of firms 
8 World Bank, Confronting Poverty in Iraq (2010) 
9 UN Iraq Knowledge Network Labour Force Factsheet, December 2011 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
31. World Bank Group analysis has identified numerous constraints on private sector 
development, most notably quality of services, the legal framework, and the role of the state.  The 
World Bank’s 2013 Doing Business Report ranks Iraq 165 out of 185 economies and Iraq ranks second to 
last among the 18 economies in the MENA region, significantly behind regional best performers on a 
global level such as Saudi Arabia (22), United Arab Emirates (26) and Qatar (40).  Even its highest 
rankings by sub-component such as "Getting Electricity" (46) "Paying Taxes" (65) and "Dealing with 
Construction Permits" (84) are extremely poor, but the most severe constraints are indicated by rankings 
for “Resolving Insolvency” (185), “Trading Across Borders” (179) and “Starting a Business” (177). 
Constraints to private sector opportunities in the non-oil economy have also been identified through the 
ICA.  The most critical constraints include lack of electricity supply, political instability and corruption.  
The ICA also reports that, in addition to political stability, reform of State-Owned Enterprises and reform 
of the poorly-performing banking sector are crucial to the well-being of the private sector. 

Figure 5: Leading Constraints to Firms Operating in Iraq 

Leading Constraints to Firms Operating In Iraq

72.5
70.3
67.6

Electricity
Political instability
Corruption
Access to Financing (Ex: Collateral)
Practices of competitors in the informal …
Access to Land 
theft,disorder and crimes
Tax Rates
Transportation
Business Licensing and Operating Permits
Regulatory Uncertainty
Tax Administration
Water
Inadequately educated workforce
Courts
Customs and Trade Regulations
Labor Regulations (Like Social Insurance)
Telecommunications

47.6
47.1
44.7
44.7
42.4
38.9
35.3
33.6
32.7
26.6
25.8
20.1
18.9
15.5
11.4

0
20
40
60
80
% of firms identifying constraint as "major" or "very severe"

32. 
The Government has placed a high priority on developing the private sector in its National 
Development Plan.  Draft legislation currently before the Parliament covers labor law, competition 
policy and establishing institutions to support private sector development. However, the existing legal 
framework suffers from poor enforcement. In addition, there is ineffective coordination between 
ministries regulating the private sector, and between the Government and the private sector. Many 
ministries have limited capacity to implement reforms and there remains some resistance to cooperating 
with the private sector at the operational level.  Despite these challenges, there is a significant potential 
for private sector-led growth, should the Government implement reforms for an improved business 
environment.  Two examples of Doing Business areas on which the Government has illustrated 
commitment to reform are business registration and construction permits.  As the construction sector is 
taking off in Iraq, the latter would generate benefits in terms of increasing economic activity and 
importantly, jobs.  

33. 
The Government also recognizes the importance of improving the performance of the 
financial sector, including creating a level playing field for non-state banks, improving access to finance 
for micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), and improving financial sector regulation and 
governance.  Iraq’s financial sector is underdeveloped and dominated by state-owned banks, weak 
private bank participation and limited access to finance by firms.  The system is not aligned with 
international standards and governance structures are weak.  In order to improve financial sector 
performance it will be important to accelerate the current reform program, including: clarifying the roles 
of state-owned banks; restructuring the two largest banks, Al-Rashid and Al-Rafidain; removing barriers 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
for private banks in doing business with the Government and state-owned banks; and adopting concrete 
measures to create a level-playing field between private and public banks.  A better enabling 
environment would facilitate access to finance, including improving credit systems, contract 
enforcement, and bankruptcy regulations. 

34. 
The telecommunications sector has provided some success stories, but its potential remains 
under-exploited.  The liberalization of mobile telecom attracted several foreign entrants and generates 
one of the few significant sources of non-oil fiscal revenue.  The fixed line backbone reaches all regions 
of the country, but is largely underutilized due to poor service quality and high tariffs.  The 
telecom/Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) sector provides potential connectivity to 
Iraqi citizens, government departments (including provincial governments) and the private sector, using 
mobile telephones, Optical Fiber Cable, Microwave, and other fixed lines and wireless technologies.  
Combined with high-performing and affordable international telecom connectivity, the sector will 
directly contribute to improvements in the business and trade environment of the country.  Broadband 
internet connectivity and ICT in general are key inputs for transformation across many sectors, and can 
help spur job creation, innovation and entrepreneurship, particularly among youth.  With the large 
connectivity gaps that currently exist, such progress becomes much more arduous. 

35. 
The agriculture sector, which employs many of the rural poor, is heavily distorted by food 
imports and agricultural subsidies and tariffs.  Although a potential source of employment, 
particularly in rural areas, the sector suffers from low investment, poor productivity, and policy 
distortions.  Currently around 20 percent of the population is employed in the agricultural sector which is 
mostly practiced on small farming units in a low input–low output system.  Policies of price and 
production controls and marketing restrictions have contributed to the sector’s low productivity and 
growth rates.  In addition, years of insufficient maintenance and funding have degraded agricultural 
services and physical infrastructure, particularly water resources and irrigation infrastructure.  On the 
policy front, Iraq currently has a top-down, centralized planning approach rather than bottom-up, 
decentralized identification of programs and projects that would put farmers and private sector in the 
driver’s seat.   

Public Service Delivery and Social Protection 

36. 
In addition to constraining private sector development, poor public service delivery is a 
major source of discontent for the Iraqi people.  Electricity and water are severely undersupplied, 
with total renewable resources dropping rapidly as a result of increased demand (due to population 
growth) and declining supplies.  Education quality is poor and schools are in need of repair and remain 
overcrowded despite operating multiple shifts.  Health outcomes are relatively low and the social 
protection system is ineffective, especially for the most vulnerable.  Iraq’s large oil revenues can be used 
to finance the needed investments in public and social services, but capacity and coordination constraints 
in Government are hampering these efforts.   

37. 
Inadequate electricity is seen by Iraqis today as a top concern, impacting daily life.  Despite 
some recent improvements, power supply continues to fall well below demand, with a national average of 
only eight hours per day in 2009. In addition, power shortages are estimated to cost the Iraqi economy 
around US$43 billion per year.  Chronic power shortages mean that Iraq must rely on expensive 
alternative supply sources, costing an estimated US$6-8 billion per year.  Iraq’s generation, 
transmission, and distribution systems are in significantly degraded condition and new power generation 
capacity is urgently needed to meet demand.  Rural areas suffer more from electricity shortages than 
urban areas because they are less able to purchase generators. Although the Government is undertaking a 
major electricity generation investment program that expects to add about 10,000 megawatts (MW) of 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
new generation by 2015, this will increase the focus on weaknesses in Iraq’s transmission and distribution 
infrastructure.  The challenges for development of Iraq’s energy sector are not only physical in nature; 
they are also financial, economic, legal and regulatory, and institutional.  Electricity tariffs are currently 
low, even by regional standards, and only cover a fraction of production costs which are high due to 
excessive losses and expensive imports of fuel and electricity.  More than 80 percent of electricity supply 
in Iraq is unbilled or uncollected.  Low tariffs contribute to significant demand growth, only exacerbating 
the pressures on electricity infrastructure.  However, it is widely recognized that to raise prices while 
supply is chronically unreliable would be socially and politically unacceptable.  Increasing the rate of 
utilization of the large volumes of gas Iraq produces in association with oil - and stopping the flaring of 
gas - could fuel most of the power generation needed in the country for decades, and thereby help with the 
current power shortage.  Gas can also provide a critical resource to the development of new industries 
(petrochemicals and heavy industries).  However, Iraqi gas institutions need support to increase their 
capacity, set out and implement a strategy, and monitor the huge investments required to treat the gas and 
bring it to the plants. 

38. While Iraq once had the most comprehensive transportation system in the region, its 
transport 
infrastructure has suffered from war damage, neglect and underinvestment.  
Rehabilitation of transport infrastructure is a national priority.  If Iraq is to have the capacity to transport 
the high volumes of international freight required to reconstruct infrastructure, buildings, and services, 
and diversify from an oil-based economy, most of the existing transport infrastructure needs to be 
rehabilitated or reconstructed and expanded.  The alleviation of some of the obstacles facing the private 
sector, including the deficiencies in infrastructure, will also provide much-needed job opportunities. 

39. 
Poor water quality and sanitation are also serious concerns.  The effectiveness of 
Government agencies to meet the day-to-day needs of water for domestic and agricultural use and the 
collection and treatment of wastewater has been greatly diminished, leading to serious environmental and 
health risks associated with contaminated water supplies and inappropriate handling of wastewater 
disposal.  This has resulted in a deterioration of the performance of water services in the country, for 
example in the Baghdad metropolitan area where 78 percent of the population has problems with its water 
supply.  In addition, the collection of wastewater is limited: only 35 percent of the urban population has 
access to the piped sewerage network.  The lack of investment in irrigation water service delivery has 
had major impacts on agricultural productivity and rural employment.  Iraq is now importing the bulk of 
its basic food needs. 

40. 
The environment in Iraq is degraded, with a high economic cost.  The World Bank estimated 
that the annual economic cost of environmental degradation in Iraq ranges from four to eight percent of 
GDP.  Management and investment to address high levels of air and water pollution would improve 
performance of all relevant sectors (e.g. sanitation, oil, agriculture, etc.).  In addition, Iraq is in the grip of 
a water crisis after recent years of severe drought, wiping out crops in some parts of the country and 
causing an unusually high number of sandstorms. In the absence of a water sharing agreement with Syria 
and Turkey, the level of water in the Tigris and the Euphrates has fallen by more than 60 percent over the 
past 20 years and water quality has deteriorated.  Municipal and hazardous waste are found in every 
urban center and most villages in Iraq with poor or non-existent collection services.  Large quantities of 
associated natural gas are being flared because gas treatment plants and the pipeline infrastructure to 
transport gas for domestic use or export are not functional.  Finally, climate change is having a profound 
impact on Iraq as it grapples with its water supply and the encroaching desert.  To combat these 
challenges, Iraq would benefit by adopting and implementing a national climate change mitigation and 
adaptation plan, and by taking advantage of international climate change initiatives. 

41. 

Iraq’s education system is suffering from a history of under-funding, degradation of 
12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure, and depletion of human resources.  In 2003, approximately 80 percent of school 
buildings were in need of rehabilitation or major repair and twelve universities were seriously damaged.10  
Reconstruction of the education system is underway, but major efforts are still needed to address the 
massive backlogs in school construction and maintenance, deficient human resource development, poor 
management at all levels, outdated curriculum and teaching methods, and poor policy and system 
development that accumulated over previous decades.  Although teacher numbers are high, there are 
issues of utilization, specialization, and deployment, resulting in large class sizes, shortages in specific 
subject areas (particularly English, mathematics and sciences), and disparities among geographical areas.  
In addition, the quality of pre-service teacher training in colleges and in-service training is considered 
inadequate, with poor facilities, lack of sufficient human resources, modern teaching materials and 
methods, and limited teaching practice within teacher training courses.  Overall, the education system 
suffers from poor quality and relevance, and graduates of the system lack the required skills to enter the 
labor market.  There is a low education level in the adult population.  Only eleven percent of Iraqis have 
at least a diploma, half the population has primary or intermediate education only, and 38 percent have no 
formal education.  In addition, there are marked regional and urban/rural differences in literacy rates and 
in the quality of education provided as Figure 6 illustrates.  These differences foster greater disparities in 
economic and social growth across Iraq which, in turn, may well increase regional inequalities and social 
fragmentation. The recently completed national education strategy aims to address these deficiencies. 

Figure 6: Literacy Rate of Segment of Population Aged 15-24 Years 

42. Women in particular lack equal access to a quality education.  There are fewer all-girl 
secondary schools (excluding KRG) as compared with all-boy schools (in 2008/09, 31 percent of 
secondary schools were for girls only, while 42 percent were for boys only).  This is important not only 
because it prevents girls from joining the labor market, but also because it prevents the high social returns 
on education in terms of improving health indicators, lowering maternal and infant mortality rates, raising 
children’s nutritional and school participation rates.  Illiteracy among Iraqi women (24 percent) is more 
than double that of Iraqi men (11 percent).  Literacy tests indicate that illiteracy rates in rural areas are 
above 50 percent for women aged 15-24. The national gender target for the 2007 to 2016 period is to 
improve the ratio of girls’ to boys’ enrollment from 87 percent to 100 percent, in primary schools, from 72 
percent to 86 percent in intermediate schools, and from 69 percent to 85 percent, in secondary schools. 

43. 
The Iraqi health system has suffered from conflict and neglect.  Prior to the 1980s, Iraq’s 
health system was considered the most advanced in the region.  However, the system has been impacted 
by war and conflict resulting in serious weaknesses of the system’s ability to meet basic health needs.  
Over the past decade, there have been some signs of improvements in health outcomes, mostly attributed 
to improved access and utilization of maternal and child health service.  Iraq’s progress to reach the 
MDG goal of reducing under-five mortality by two-thirds by 2015 as well as its progress towards 

10 Iraq United Nations/World Bank Joint Needs Assessment – Education Sector, October 2003 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
attaining a three-fourth reduction in maternal mortality, another MDG goal, are deemed insufficient at this 
juncture, mainly as a result of weak governance and oversight, wide urban/rural disparities in access to 
quality care, and a shortage of facilities and qualified health professionals. Iraq spends about 3.3 percent 
of GDP on healthcare (US$137 per capita), relatively modest for its level of socioeconomic development. 
While about 75 percent of total health spending in Iraq is public, spending is highly skewed towards 
pharmaceuticals (37 percent) and administration (22 percent) pointing out the inherent inefficiencies in 
health expenditures.  Going forward, a look at expenditure flows against services received at the facility 
level would be essential to get a complete picture of the sector’s performance and would help the 
Government devise appropriate policies to improve the quality of health services and efficiency of the 
sector.  

44. 
Providing adequate social protection remains an important challenge, particularly for the 
most vulnerable, such as widows and IDPs.  The Government has been introducing structural changes, 
while attempting to rationalize subsidies and transition from the universal food subsidy (Public 
Distribution System - PDS) to a better-targeted cash transfer program that can meet the needs of the 
poorest and most vulnerable.  The cash-based Social Safety Net program administered by the Ministry of 
Labor and Social Affairs has expanded to cover nearly one million families but targeting remains 
inefficient.  The pension law of 2007 presented significant improvements, and other major laws are 
underway, including the creation of mechanisms to provide portability of benefit entitlements across 
private and public pensions schemes so that workers are not penalized when moving from the public to the 
private sectors or vice versa.  

Government Priorities 

45. 
In 2009, the Government prepared a medium-term development strategy, the Iraq National 
Development Plan (NDP) 2010-2014, which aims to build a market-based economy in Iraq.  The 
strategy has nine main goals: (i) to achieve economic growth at 9.4 percent per year; (ii) to generate 3 to 
4.5 million new jobs; (iii) to diversify the economy away from oil and into agriculture, industrial sectors 
(oil and gas, petrochemical industries, chemical fertilizers, cement, pharmaceutical industries), and 
tourism (recreational, religious, and cultural); (iv) to create a stronger role for the private sector, both in 
terms of investment and creating job opportunities; (v) to improve productivity and promote competition; 
(vi) to reduce poverty by 30 percent from 2007 levels by focusing on comprehensive rural development, 
job creation, and provision of basic services such as education and healthcare services, particularly for 
vulnerable groups such as youth and women; (vii) to establish a spatial development trend characterized 
by a fair distribution of infrastructure and public services; (viii) to focus on sustainable development that 
balances economic, social, and environmental considerations, thereby using available natural resources in 
a sustainable way; and (ix) to strengthen the role of local governments to take charge of local economic 
development and delivery of services to the people. 

46. 
To achieve these objectives, the NDP proposes an investment program of 218 trillion Iraqi 
dinars, or US$186 billion over the plan period, of which US$100 billion would be funded by the federal 
budget and the remaining US$86 billion would be funded by the private sector.  Sector priorities in the 
NDP include oil, electricity, agriculture, transportation and communication, and regional development.  
Higher priority is given to the oil (15 percent of total proposed investment) and electricity (10 percent of 
total proposed investment) sectors.  Agriculture is seen as important from the perspective of economic 
diversification, food security, employment opportunities generation, and reducing poverty and migration 
to urban areas.  The transportation and communications sectors are deemed critical in terms of enhancing 
connectivity with other sectors.  Similarly, the NDP reserves 12.5 percent of its investments for the 
regional development program, and 17 percent of total Government investment (or higher depending on 
the next population census) to the KRG.  Finally, the NDP allocates 22 percent of the Government 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
investment program to the social sectors.  The NDP recognizes that investment alone is not sufficient and 
proposes complementary policy and institutional reforms, and mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation 
of the NDP.  The NDP is in the process of being updated to cover the period 2013-17. 

47. 
The Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), developed with the support of the Bank and adopted in 
January 2009, complements the NDP in its focus on poverty.  Both strategies share a common goal of 
reducing poverty by 30 percent, from 23 percent in 2009 to 16 percent in 2014, through higher incomes 
and better health, education, social protection and housing services for the poor.  In addition, the PRS 
sets out specific goals in terms of human development: (i) reduce the illiteracy rate by half (from 28 
percent to 14 percent), and raise the net enrollment rate in primary education (from 75 percent to 98 
percent), in intermediate education (from 21 percent to 50 percent), and in secondary education (from 23 
percent to 40 percent); (ii) reduce the number of individuals covered by the food ration card and restrict 
coverage to those who are below the poverty line by 2014; and (iii) bridge the gender gap, including 
through higher women participation in the labor force, and higher ratios of girls to boys in literacy and 
primary and secondary education. 

BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

III. 
A.  
Lessons Learned from Previous Engagement and Stakeholder Feedback 
48. 
Despite an extremely challenging operating environment and security conditions, the Bank 
Group over the past three Interim Strategy Notes (ISNs) has achieved some successes, and has 
learned a number of lessons which will inform the present CPS.  The need for realism, for leveraging 
the Government’s own vast resources, and for having strong government ownership and reform 
champions are the main lessons learned during the implementation of the last ISN series. 

49. 
Following a long period of disengagement, the Bank made a decision to reengage in Iraq at 
the time of the Iraq Donor Conference in Madrid in 2003. The initial post-conflict reconstruction 
program, the bulk of which was designed in 2004-05, was wide-ranging and ambitious, with the Bank 
involved in nearly all sectors and optimism regarding expected improvements in the security and political 
situation in the country.  There was strong pressure for the World Bank, as other donors, to respond very 
quickly to the reconstruction and recovery needs.  Projects were thus prepared on a very rapid timetable 
with limited knowledge of the country context, sectors and the institutional environment.  As a result, 
much of what normally would be accomplished during project preparation was left to be addressed during 
project implementation.  When, contrary to expectations, the situation in Iraq deteriorated, the operating 
environment became untenable. The Bank tried to mitigate risks and adapt to the changing realities, but 
the complex political and authorizing environment were not conducive to such adaptation.  Another 
feature of Iraq’s post-conflict environment was the exodus of the technical and professional cadre, and 
this had an impact on the Government’s ability to implement the program.  Experience points to the need 
to be more alert to the changing circumstances, and to be more candid as to the political economy of 
conflict-affected situations and the limitations of donors’ intervention in such environments.  Experience 
also shows that political considerations, while always important to bear in mind, need to be managed so as 
to avoid impossible mandates and the resulting failures.  In view of the limited capacity of the 
Government, and with the bulk of the Bank’s current post-conflict lending assistance winding down, this 
CPS presents an opportunity to apply the lessons learned from the Bank Group’s past engagement and to 
deliver technical and financial support to maximize the effectiveness of Iraq’s own resources.   

50. 
The Bank Group should be realistic about its role and potential for impact in a 
resource-rich country with a difficult operating environment. The size of the Bank-supported 
program is very small relative to the Iraqi budget. This fact, combined with a natural preoccupation with 
domestic political and security issues and a history of isolation from international best practice, resulted in 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
a lack of traction on the Government side. This situation would have required intensive, on-the-ground 
supervision and implementation support by World Bank task teams, but this approach was not possible 
due to the difficult security situation and the limited ability of Bank staff to work directly with 
counterparts on the ground. The use of the Bank’s agent on the ground, the Fiduciary Management Agent 
(FMA) (Box 1), was an innovative solution that offset the lack of access and provided a good level of 
fiduciary oversight. Over the past few years, the Bank was also able to increase its presence on the ground 
and bring the dialogue closer to the client.  Although the Bank has accomplished a great deal under 
unusual circumstances, it remains to be seen whether the existing portfolio will have satisfactory 
outcomes considering the operating environment.  If the security situation were to deteriorate again in a 
significant way, lessons learned indicate the need for an appropriate level of expectations on results and 
careful management decisions as to the degree of Bank Group engagement. 
Box 1: Portfolio and Supervision Arrangements 

Unconventional Supervision: Use of a Fiduciary Management Agent in Iraq 
Since 2004, the Bank has used a group of Iraqi engineers, financial management, and procurement professionals as a 
Fiduciary Management Agent (FMA) to assist in monitoring, supervision and capacity building for the investment 
portfolio, and in helping ensure compliance with Bank fiduciary standards and guidelines. Experience with the FMA has 
been positive, with the FMA acting as the Bank’s eyes and ears on the ground, particularly when some areas are 
inaccessible. The FMA visits sites, documents physical works and sends monthly reports on procurement and financial 
management. This is arguably a much broader scope of coverage than is carried out for most Bank projects around the 
world.  
The FMA contract is renewed annually and is subject to satisfactory performance as confirmed by annual evaluations, 
feedback from which is fed back into contract performance indicators.  The FMA participates in all official Bank 
supervision missions, follows up regularly with the Project Management Teams on implementation of actions identified 
during supervision, and flags as necessary issues in project implementation worthy of management attention. 
The FMA arrangement is working well and the mechanism will continue to be used for as long as the security situation 
restricts Bank staff access to project sites across Iraq.  Intensity of FMA services will decrease as most projects close in 
2013; however this will still be an option for future IBRD projects. 

51. 
One key challenge for IFC’s involvement in Iraq over the last few years has been to find the 
right local partners. The private sector is small and faces serious capacity issues. A key element in going 
forward will be to identify and support local investors who have the potential to grow, can embrace best 
practices in how to conduct their businesses, and are able to effectively work with IFC and other 
International Financial Institutions. 

52. 
Against this background, the Bank Group will focus efforts on knowledge transfer and 
ensure that financial support leverages Iraq’s own resources while delivering needed technical 
assistance to enhance capacity of the Government and private sector institutions.  Iraq now has 
considerable resources at its disposal, but its capacity to plan and implement development programs is 
still too weak. During CPS consultations, Government stakeholders indicated that transfer of knowledge, 
provision of advisory services and capacity building were considered high priorities for Bank assistance.  

53. 
Going forward, the Bank will ensure that its interventions are responsive to client demand 
and receptivity to reform.  In a number of areas, client engagement, capacity and ability to carry out 
reforms have been low. Based on experience, the Bank will focus on undertaking activities to which the 
Government is engaged and committed.  

54. 
Lessons from the 2011 World Development Report (WDR) are also being applied in this 
CPS.  For example, a Community Driven Development (CDD) approach has been piloted successfully 
in KRG, and work is underway to expand this program.  The CPS also provides greater focus on gender, 
regional and cross-border initiatives, and a major focus on service delivery as a way to build up 
confidence in the effectiveness and credibility of the State. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multi-stakeholder Consultations 

55. 
A wide variety of stakeholders confirmed the need for support from the Bank in rebuilding 
the capacity of state institutions to lead policy reforms, implement the Government’s development 
programs and deliver services to the people.  The Bank carried out several intensive consultation 
missions and met with a variety of stakeholders, including senior government officials, project 
management teams, donor representatives, and members of civil society in Baghdad, Erbil, Basra, Dohuk, 
Mosul and Al-Muthanna.  Electronic media was also used to support the CPS consultation process and 
reach a wider audience. Consultations broadly confirmed the strategic thrust of the Bank's proposed 
approach, focusing primarily on supporting Iraq to plan and properly use its own financial resources, 
design and implement institutional reforms needed to spur economic diversification and create jobs, and 
increase its capacity for service delivery.  Strengthened capacity of public institutions—both at the 
central and local government levels—was underscored by all stakeholders.  

Current World Bank Group Portfolio 

56. 
Since 2004, the World Bank has supported Iraq’s reconstruction and development through 
a US$1 billion program. This includes US$500 million in Iraq Trust Fund (ITF) grants and an 
exceptional International Development Association (IDA) allocation of US$500 million in credits.  The 
program has supported a number of areas, including infrastructure reconstruction in water, power, and 
roads, education and health, private sector development, telecoms, social protection, public financial 
management and reform of the two state-owned banks. In 2010, the IBRD financed a US$250 million 
Development Policy Loan which supported strengthening budget management and prioritization; 
reforming the financial sector; and improving the efficiency of the social protection system. 

57. 
As of September 30, 2012, Iraq’s total active ITF and IDA portfolio of 25 projects amounted 
to US$860 million, with 54 percent disbursed. This included: 11 projects financed by ITF grants 
amounting to US$316 million (76 percent disbursed); five IDA investment lending operations amounting 
to US$508.5 million (39 percent disbursed); and three grants from Bank-administered trust funds (the 
State and Peace Building Fund (SPBF), the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF), and the EITI Trust 
Fund).  Iraq is also a member of the Global Gas Flaring Reduction initiative led by the Bank Group. 
Combined, the Water, Sanitation and Urban Development Sectors make up the largest share of the 
portfolio at 33 percent followed by Electricity/Energy, and Education at 21 percent and 19 percent, 
respectively (Figure 7).  

Figure 7: Active Portfolio 

Sectoral Distribution

Private/
Finance 
Sector
3%

Health
0.1%

Education
19%

Water/ 
Sanitat ion 
U rban
33%

Rural Devt
3%

Transport
16%

17 

Capacity 
Bldg/
Public Adm .
4%

Elect r icity/
Energy
21%

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58. 
A gender review of the Iraq portfolio was undertaken to inform this CPS.  Much of the 
existing portfolio consists of reconstruction and recovery projects designed in 2004-2006 and set to close 
in the coming year or two.  The portfolio focused on emergency reconstruction and recovery needs, and 
while certain activities did address gender directly, gender considerations were not mainstreamed in the 
design.  Going forward, the gender review identified entry points for a greater focus on gender (Box 2). 

Box 2: Observations from a Gender Review of the Iraq Portfolio 
A review of the Iraq portfolio points to a number of areas where the Bank’s work has had a gender focus.  The 2007 household 
survey, carried out under difficult and dangerous conditions, was the most comprehensive socio-economic survey ever 
undertaken in Iraq.  It captured sex-disaggregated data, particularly for social and economic indicators.  On the basis of this 
survey the Iraqi authorities developed an official poverty line and the first Poverty Reduction Strategy in 2010.  A new 
household survey is expected to be completed by December 2012, following which the data will be compiled.  This will 
provide updated sex-disaggregated data on which a Gender and Poverty Assessment to be done in FY14 will be based.  The 
Bank is also providing TA to help Iraq reform its Public Distribution System with special efforts for household targeting tools 
to be sensitive to the gender of the household head and address vulnerabilities such as Internally Displaced Persons and 
widows.  
On education, the National Education Strategy includes a policy for increasing girls’ enrollment which will benefit from 
insights in the new household survey.  The Emergency Health Project has a special focus on vulnerable groups, including 
pregnant women and children.  Due to the low number of female healthcare professionals and social sensitivities of using 
healthcare facilities run by males, the project is expanding the number of women health volunteers and using mobile health 
clinics.  While gender considerations were not necessarily integrated into the design of the Capacity Building 2 project, a 
series of workshops were held on Leadership Skills for Policy Reform for Iraqi Female Parliamentarians.  The upcoming 
Water Sector Strategy could be a good entry point for looking at gender disaggregated data where it exists and gaining a better 
understanding of the different roles and needs of men and women with regard to water and sanitation services.  
In Private Sector Development (PSD), gender has been integrated into activities, including: measures to help the Regulatory 
Reform Unit identify and address gender issues when developing new policies; a more inclusive approach to consulting with 
NGOs; giving priority to women in the provision of microfinance loans; and to gender issues in dialogue and programs 
provided by Iraq business associations through the Private Sector Development Center.  The ICA included diagnostics on 
women and gender issues.  Sex-disaggregated data and analysis will be an important resource for informing PSD activities 
going forward, particularly in light of Iraq’s goal of increasing women’s share of non-agricultural waged work.  Gender is also 
very relevant in the Youth Livelihood Project which includes promoting women’s participation in life/work skills training.  
Going forward, the forthcoming poverty and gender assessment will provide updated data to inform the Bank-supported 
projects in the pipeline. While the household survey will be key to providing gender disaggregated data along many important 
welfare dimensions, efforts will also be made to collect project-level data, particularly in areas where the survey data will fall 
short, such as infrastructure.  Finally, the Bank will emphasize gender mainstreaming in its dialogue with the Government on 
the update of Iraq’s Poverty Reduction Strategy and the Government’s budget. 

59. 
Portfolio performance has improved, but the implementation environment remains 
challenging.  The security situation in Iraq has improved and the pace of project implementation has 
increased considerably since 2006.  However, conditions on the ground continue to hamper mobility of 
Bank staff and Project Management Teams, consultants and contractors. Security conditions also 
discourage local and international contactors from bidding and substantially increase project costs.  The 
Bank’s Fiduciary Monitoring Agent (see Box 1) continues to support the Bank’s project supervision 
efforts through physical verification and monitoring of procurement and financial management. 
Procedures and institutional capacity constraints in line ministries (e.g., unclear lines of authority, 
inefficient review, approval, and oversight procedures) further impede project implementation, delaying 
decision-making, reporting, and follow up.  Contract management has also been a continuing problem in 
Iraq, often leading to work of inferior quality or protracted delays in contract implementation.  A weak 
banking system poses challenges for disbursement.  Five projects are currently in problem status.  These 
projects benefit from heightened supervision (3-4 times per year) and continuous updates and discussions, 
including with the Joint Portfolio Oversight Committee (JPOC) co-chaired by the Prime Minister’s 
Advisory Board and the World Bank.   

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60. 
The Government and the Bank are working to strengthen portfolio performance.  The 
JPOC meets quarterly, following an Action Plan updated at the June 2011 Country Portfolio Performance 
Review (CPPR).  The CPPR focused on the need to enhance capacity building, monitoring and 
evaluation, incorporate projects into the national budget, and address challenges related to low 
disbursements and implementation of Designated Accounts and E-signatures.  As most projects move 
towards closing by the end of 2013, the focus will be on ensuring that projects disburse existing funds and 
have strong monitoring and evaluation systems in place to assess progress towards meeting their 
development objectives. 

61. 
IFC has a growing and diversified investment and advisory portfolio in Iraq.  IFC's 
investments in Iraq have increased significantly over the last few years, with the portfolio growing from 
only US$10 million in FY05 to nearly US$300 million today.  In late 2011, IFC established a field 
presence in Iraq for the first time by placing a full-time Senior Country Officer in Bagdad.  IFC signed an 
Establishment Agreement with the Government of Iraq in October 2012 for an official Country Office in 
Bagdad (co-located with the Bank), and plans to increase its presence in the field during the CPS period.  
IFC’s investments have aimed to support the private sector and leverage regional investments, and will be 
complemented by a strong Advisory Services (AS) program during the planned CPS period. IFC’s 
portfolio is diverse, and investments have supported the establishment of the Erbil Rotana Hotel, a cement 
company, and the banking, telecommunications, and logistics and warehousing sectors (including 
through equity investments).  Recent large investments include: (i) US$155 million in Zain Telecom; (ii) 
US$45 million in a transport and logistics company (Gulftainer); (iii) US$45 million in Lafarge Cement; 
and (iii) around US$35 million in the financial and hotel sectors.  While IFC’s early investments in the 
cement sector were cancelled due to security and sponsor issues, the current portfolio is performing well 
and having an impact on the ground.  As the political, policy and security environment shows further 
improvement, IFC anticipates strong demand for the financing of private investments in Iraq across a 
variety of real and financial sectors.  In addition to its investment engagement, IFC has started to provide 
advisory support in the areas of investment climate, financial infrastructure strengthening, capacity 
building of the banking/MSME sector and bank risk management, selective SME management training 
(especially targeting women), and the promotion of public-private partnerships in collaboration with the 
World Bank.  IFC advisory support in Iraq has tried to focus on gender aspects, especially through its 
access to finance and Business Edge programs.  IFC has been active in training banking staff in modern 
banking practices, training events targeting Iraqi business women, and has made early efforts to 
specifically support private sector-led development of the local construction industry.  IFC’s advisory 
work is supported by the US$38 million multi-donor Iraq Business Advisory Fund (IBAF) provided by 
the US, United Kingdom (UK), Spain, and Japan: US$10 million of this funding is earmarked for 
microfinance investments.  MIGA has supported one investment in the manufacturing sector thus far. 
B.  
Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy 
62. 
The overarching objective of the World Bank Group engagement will be to support the 
country’s efforts to build stronger government institutions and a more diversified and regionally- 
integrated economy that can deliver services and create jobs.  This objective is supported by three 
pillars which are aligned with the emphasis of the MENA Regional Framework on governance, 
sustainable private sector-led growth, job creation and inclusion.  These are: (1) improving governance; 
(2) supporting economic diversification for broadly-shared prosperity; and (3) improving social inclusion 
and reducing poverty.  IFC will contribute to the strategy through an integrated program of advisory and 
investment work to help diversify the economy away from the oil sector.  This will be done by 
developing a favorable business and regulatory environment and fostering responsive institutions to 
strengthen job-creating, private sector-led growth in the non-oil sectors. MIGA will mainly contribute to 
Pillar 2.   

19 

 
 
 
 
63. 
The Bank is moving from Interim Strategy Notes to a Country Partnership Strategy.  This 
shift responds to the Government’s request for a deeper and more substantial engagement and represents a 
longer-term Bank commitment.  This is the first World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy for 
Iraq with a fully integrated IBRD, IFC and MIGA program.  The Bank Group aims to accompany the 
country through the CPS period, supporting the Government in making important policy choices that will 
set the stage for the country’s development.  The four-year timeframe covered by the CPS will also allow 
planning within a longer time horizon, in keeping with the 2011 WDR recommendations for countries 
emerging from conflict.  It will also serve as a bridge between a concessionally-financed reconstruction 
and recovery investment portfolio and a forward-looking, demand-driven program.  

64. 
The World Bank Group’s program will emphasize knowledge transfer, using all the 
available instruments, including AAA, lending and reimbursable services.  A key feature of the 
Bank’s support lies in bringing global knowledge and experience to the table and connecting Iraq with 
international practitioners.  Exposure to other country experiences has proven to be very useful in Iraq’s 
case given that the country has emerged from war and isolation and has experienced an exodus of skilled 
civil servants.  The Bank is committed to serving as a broker of knowledge and will bring to bear 
solutions for Iraq’s most pressing development challenges in the coming years. 

65. 
A proposed program is outlined under the Pillars to support this agenda.  Analytical and 
advisory activities include, inter alia, follow-up work to a Public Expenditure Review, a Report on Oil 
Revenue Management for Economic Diversification, a Poverty and Gender Assessment, Agriculture 
Technical Assistance, a Gas Master System Study, and Financial Sector Dialogue.  IBRD projects 
amounting to US$540 million have been identified starting in FY14 for five projects, including: 
Integrated Financial Management Information Systems; Governance; Trade and Transport Corridors; 
Irrigation and Water Resources; and Water Supply and Sewerage.  In addition, a program of 
Reimbursable Services is being developed. While the future program will be largely demand-driven, and 
IBRD lending will be pursued only in the presence of strong government ownership, there are areas which 
are seen to be high priorities for Bank engagement due to their integral role in the country’s development.  
These include governance, financial sector development, and gender. 

66. 
Trust Funds play an important role in the Bank’s program in Iraq and are fully integrated 
into the Strategy.  Most importantly, the US$532 million Iraq Trust Fund will close during the CPS 
period.  The EITI Trust Fund is an important part of Pillar 1, while Pillar 2 benefits substantially from a 
US$13.2 Private Sector Development Trust Fund 11.  Pillar 3 is supported by a successful State and Peace 
Building Fund Community Driven Development pilot in the KRG as well as JSDF grants. 

67. 
The following table elaborates ongoing, planned, and potential support under the main pillars of 
engagement. 

11 Supported by Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA), the US, and formerly by DFID. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
I.  Improv ing Gove rnance

III.  Improv ing Social Inclus ion and Re ducing Pove rty

Table 2: INDICATIVE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

II.  Supporting Economic Dive rs ification for B roadly Share d Pros pe rity
ONGOING ENGAGEMENT

IDA
Emergency Road Rehabilitation
Dokan & Derbandikhan Emergency Hydropower
Emergency Electricity Reconstruction

ITF 1/
Public Financial Management Reform

EITI
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 

ITF 1/
Banking Sector Reform
Integrated National Energy Strategy
Emergency Community Infrast. Rehab. Additional Financing
Emergency Electricity Reconstruction

16.0

0.8

Total

16 .8

ITF - TA Executed on Beha lf of the GOI 1/
Second Capacity Building (TA)
Public Financial Management Reform (TA)

IFC
Investment Climate Regulatory Reform Intervention
Advisory Services for Improving Financial Infrastructure & SME 
Investments in Telecom Sector
JSDF
Youth Livelihoods Development in Southern Iraq 

9.4
2.0
11 .4 MDTF (DFID / SIDA) - TA Bank-Executed
P rivate Sector Development (TA)

Total

Total

135.0
40.0
124.0
299 .0

10.0
6.9
25.5
6.0

Total

48 .4

IDA
Third Emergency Education P roject
Emergency Water Supply

ITF 1/
Emergency School Construction & Rehabilitation
Emergency Baghdad Water Supply
Emergency Water Supply, Sanitation & Urban Reconst.
Emergency Social P rotection 
Second Emergency P rimary Health Care Assistance
Household Survey & Policies for Poverty Reduction

SPBF
Consultative Service Delivery P rogram II

2 .7

13 .2

ITF - TA Executed on Beha lf of the GOI 1/
Pension Reform Implementation Support (TA)
Rationalization of the Public Distribution System (TA)
Education Sector Institutional Strengthening & Capacity Bldg (TA)
Household Survey & Policies for Poverty Reduction (TA)

Total

100.0
109.5

Total 209 .5

60.0
65.0
110.0
8.0
1.2
7.0
Total 251 .2

5 .0

5.8
2.6
2.7
5.1
16 .2

Total Ongo ing 481 .9

100.0

Total 100 .0

Diagnostic & Technica l Assistance
Country Economic Memorandum (ESW) (recently completed)
Public Expenditure Review (ESW) (recently completed)

Total Ongo ing

28 .2

IBRD
Integrated Financial Management Information systems (IFMIS) (FY14)
Public Financial Management /Governance (FY15)

Total

Diagnostic & Technica l Assistance
Public Expenditure Review II Follow-up (AAA)
Water Public Expenditure Review (ESW)
Local Governance/Fiscal Decentralization (TA)
Public Sector Governance (TA)
KRG P rocurement Reform (TA)
Financial Management TA (Inspector Generals)
Reserves Asset Management P rogram (TA) (under identification)
Public Financial Management (TA)

Reg iona l Initia tives
University Governance Scorecard (TA)
System Approach for Better Education Results Workforce Development
Diagnostic & Technica l Assistance
Economic Complementarity & Deeper Regional Integration (ESW)
Gas P ricing Study (TA)
Establishment of Asset Valuation Unit in Ministry of Finance (TA) 2/
Total Ongo ing 363 .3

FY13-16 PROGRAM 3/

IBRD
40.0 Trade & Transport Corridors (FY14)
60.0 Irrigation Water Management/Water Resources P roject (FY14)
100 .0

IBRD
200.0 Water Supply & Sewerage (Baghdad) (FY15)
140.0
340 .0

Total

Diagnostic & Technica l Assistance
Country Economic Memorandum II Follow-up (AAA)
Agriculture (AAA)
Investment Climate Assessment Reform (TA)
Telecoms (TA)
Gas Master System Study (TA)
Financial Sector Dialogue (TA)
Water Sector Strategy (ESW)
Environment (AAA)
IFC
Public Credit Registry Development 

Diagnostic  & Technica l Assistance
Capacity Bldg. for Education, including Implementation of National
   Education Strategy (TA)
Social P rotection Strategy (ESW)
Health System Strengthening (TA)
Poverty Gender Assessment (ESW)

GRAND TOTAL Ongo ing and Planne d
128 .2
Notes:  Amounts in USD millions. A program of reimbursable services is at very early stages of discussions.
1/  The Iraq Trust Fund (ITF) will terminate on December 31, 2013.  2/  Funded by US State Department.  3/  These are the activities that have been defined at the time of CPS discussions with the Government.  However, this CPS is intended to be 
a flexible framework and additional activities are expected to be added to the program upon Government demand and in line with the Strategy.

GRAND TOTAL Ongo ing and Planne d

703 .3

GRAND TOTAL Ongo ing and Planne d

581 .9

21 

 
 
 
Result Area 1: Improving Governance 
CPS Outcome Areas: 
1. Improved transparency and efficiency of oil revenue management and public spending 
2. Achievement of one or more features of the Governance Action Plan 

68. 
Low institutional capacity hampers the optimal use of Iraq’s existing wealth of natural and 
financial resources.  Building on the ongoing engagement in the management of public finances, the 
Bank will continue to support improvements in institutional capacity and governance through technical 
assistance to improve Government-wide systems and practices, public financial management, 
transparency in oil revenue management (particularly through the continuation of the ongoing EITI 
program), a joint training program with the IMF and World Bank Treasury Department on debt reporting 
and management, and focused attention on governance issues at the sector level.  The Bank will also 
support the Government on institutional reforms and capacity building to strengthen the state’s oversight 
and control capabilities.  The Central Bank of Iraq has expressed interest in participating in the World 
Bank Treasury Reserves Advisory Management Program which helps build capacity in central banks to 
manage reserves. 

69. 
Sound fiscal and macroeconomic policy, including transparency of oil revenues, is critical 
for Iraq’s development.  The Bank will help to put in place an analytical framework for informed 
decision-making on the allocation of its overall resource envelope.  The 2012 reports on Economic 
Diversification for Oil Revenue Management and Public Expenditure Review (PER) provide a diagnostic 
base for developing a macro-fiscal framework to assist Iraqi policy makers in measuring petroleum 
financial flows and making informed spending and saving decisions consistent with the Government’s 
economic vision.  This work is aimed at helping the Government address key issues in revenue 
management and spending efficiency and will be followed up by support on implementation.  

70. 
The ongoing PFM Reform Project will deliver improved business processes in budget 
preparation, budget execution, and public procurement and capacity building of the Ministry of 
Finance Accounting Training Center so that it can conduct future training of Ministry of Finance 
staff in a sustainable manner.  The project will also deliver and test a prototype for an Integrated 
Financial Management System (IFMIS) in three ministries and three governorate treasuries by June 2013.  
If tested successfully, the Government intends to ‘pilot’ the system in selected ministries and treasuries as 
the 'primary' system in 2014 and will ‘go live’ with the system in all ministries and treasuries in 2015.  
This will be supported through a new IBRD project of US$40 million in FY14.  The PFM project 
includes a capacity building component for the Board of Supreme Audit (BSA) to strengthen Iraq’s 
accountability mechanisms.  The Bank helped draft a consolidated Procurement Law and will continue 
to support procurement reform through the development of a single portal website for procurement 
notices and the development of sector bidding documents.   

71. 
The Bank Group is engaged in a structured dialogue around transparency, accountability 
and participation and has worked with the Government to develop a draft Governance Action 
Plan.  The Bank will support the implementation of the Governance Action Plan, including development 
of a law on Access to Information.  Bank activities will stress the importance of citizen participation, 
including women, in the design and implementation of government programs.  In areas where the Bank 
maintains sectoral dialogue with the Government, the Bank will support the Government in developing 
the practice of public consultations.  The Bank will also look at social accountability measures in sectors 
where this might be feasible on a pilot basis.  The Bank will also support the Government’s efforts on 
decentralization and local governance with the aim of facilitating a constructive and informed debate on 
decentralization policy in Iraq which fits its specific context and constitutional requirements.  The 
Government has expressed its interest in an IBRD project in FY15 for the Budget Directorate on 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Governance. 

72. 
Other capacity building efforts that have shown traction and will be continued include 
working closely with the Government on strategy development, including the National Poverty 
Reduction Strategy, Integrated National Energy Strategy, Education Strategy, and pensions and social 
safety nets (see Annex 3).  This includes bringing Iraqi officials to see examples of other country policies 
and practices and engaging in discussion with international practitioners.  This approach has been 
successful and brings to bear the World Bank’s comparative advantage of sharing global knowledge and 
international practice to a country that has been isolated through decades of war.  The Bank will support 
“on-the-job” training in terms of capacity building including, where appropriate, supporting a move from 
conventional construction contracts towards “Design-Build-Operate” / turnkey contracts to provide more 
Iraqi staff with the experience required to manage future investments, while also building capacity in the 
private sector. 

 
Result Area 2: Supporting Economic Diversification for Broadly-Shared Prosperity 
CPS Outcome Areas: 
1. Strengthened approaches to an improved business environment 
2. Strengthened supervisory framework for financial intermediation and capacity of financial institutions 
3. Strengthened infrastructure services 

73. 
The Bank Group will support the Government’s efforts towards economic diversification.  
This will be done through policy advice and analysis in support of building an enabling environment for 
private sector development, reforming the financial sector, and encouraging public-private partnerships, 
Public-Private Dialogue and trade facilitation.  While the diversification challenge cuts across numerous 
policy domains, enhancing the environment for private sector development is certainly at the core of the 
agenda.  It is through the private sector, and not further increases in the size of the public sector, that new 
jobs will be created and broad-based economic development can be achieved.  The Bank Group’s 
interventions will support efforts for bringing more women into the workforce.  

74. 
The Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) identified several reform areas that should be 
undertaken to address the major concerns of firms in Iraq.  Electricity is a top constraint.  Other 
concerns include Access to Finance; Access to Land; Access to Labor and Gender Equality; Access to 
Infrastructure, including power supply, water, transport and trade; SOE Reform; Control of Corruption; 
and Informality.  The Bank has identified policy reform recommendations and stands ready to assist in 
any of these areas. 

75. 
Through the Private Sector Development Trust Fund, the Bank will continue to support the 
Government’s efforts to restructure the SOE sector and create a level playing field for private 
sector investment in productive activities.  This includes support in identifying SOEs that are ready for 
reform, working to reform 180 SOEs, and strengthening the capacity of Ministries to lead reform efforts, 
for example in budget and business planning, labor restructuring and performance management. 
Additional Technical Assistance (TA) will support the establishment and operation of an SOE “Asset 
Valuation Unit” within the Ministry of Finance to improve oversight of SOE assets.  The Bank will also 
support the establishment and operation of Regulatory Reform Units to provide oversight and improved 
quality control over business regulations.  Gender aspects are integrated into the PSD Trust Fund taking 
into account the low female labor force participation rate (among the lowest in the region) and the 
concentration of women in the public sector.  IFC will also support reforms in corporate governance and 
investment climate, including and jointly with the Bank’s follow up to the ICA, improving the 
construction permit process as one starting point where there is clear demand from the Government, and 
thus providing a platform for further reforms.  Finally, the Bank will continue providing advisory support 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for regulatory reform at the national and subnational levels, including for starting a business.  

76. 
The World Bank and IFC advisory services will support the Government’s introduction of 
Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) in Iraq.  The Bank Group is currently supporting PPP legislation 
prepared by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and the rollout of PPP 
pilots and technical assistance to several ministries, including the Ministry of Electricity, Ministry of 
Industry and Minerals, and the Ministry of Construction and Housing.  Such activities will be 
complemented where possible by the use of the Technical Advisory Facility of the Arab Financing 
Facility for Infrastructure.  IFC is ready to engage in supporting the implementation of the PPP program 
in the electricity and transport sectors and will explore the associated financing opportunities in 
partnership with MIGA.  The World Bank and IFC could also assist in the process of privatizing existing 
assets or introducing private sector management to non-infrastructure-related services. 

77. MIGA will continue to support Iraq’s efforts to attract foreign private investors through 
the provision of political risk guarantees.  Supporting investments in fragile and conflict-affected 
environments is one of MIGA’s global strategic pillars, and therefore Iraq is a focus country for MIGA 
engagement.  Having already supported one manufacturing investment project, MIGA remains open to 
supporting investments into Iraq from all countries, including South-based and regional investors.  Iraq's 
membership in MIGA is recent (2008) and MIGA’s activities in Iraq will further develop as demand for 
its services is expected to increase.  MIGA’s program will be aligned with the broader WBG strategy and 
activities and focus on agribusiness, finance, services, telecommunications and infrastructure.  Private 
investors have shown interest in partnering with MIGA for investments into Iraq and MIGA stands ready 
to support sustainable projects with a high development impact, including through its Small Investment 
Program. 

78. 
Reforming the financial sector is at the heart of the economic diversification strategy for 
Iraq.  The Bank supported the development and adoption of an action plan that includes improving 
access to finance for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and modernizing financial sector 
regulation and governance.  The Bank will continue to support the Government’s effort at reforming the 
state-owned banks – Al-Rashid and Al-Rafidain – and removing the barriers for private banks in doing 
business with the Government and state-owned banks.  The Bank’s program will focus on helping the 
Government to create a better enabling environment to allow access to finance, including improving the 
credit systems, contract enforcement, and bankruptcy regulations.  The Bank will also support the 
alignment of the system to international standards, as well as help in strengthening governance structures. 
The ongoing Banking Sector Reform project is supporting this work and helping build up the Central 
Bank of Iraq’s capacities in banking and financial sector supervision.  IFC will provide a combination of 
advisory and investment support for regional and international investors in Iraq and promote reforms 
related to Access to Finance and investment climate, including improvements in financial infrastructure 
and support to private banks to expand credit to microfinance institutions and SMEs.  The WBG’s efforts 
to improve access to finance for SMEs and regulatory reforms will be gender informed.  For example, 
gender differences in ability to open a bank account, sign a contract, register a business, and manage 
property will be considered.  IFC will provide training to SMEs, especially women entrepreneurs, 
through its Business Edge Program. 

79. 
Trade reforms and regional integration will help economic diversification.  The Bank will 
provide analysis and recommendations through analytical work, Economic Complementarity and Deeper 
Regional Integration: Iraq, Turkey and the Mashreq.  This is in line with the WBG Trade Strategy which 
includes supporting diversification and improving trade facilitation and complementary policies that can 
improve competitiveness.  Support for customs modernization and trade and transport facilitation are 
also important areas of support and a US$200 million Trade and Transport Facilitation IBRD Project is 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
under preparation.  

80. 
The Bank will help Iraq improve the quality and delivery of its core infrastructure services 
through a combination of investments and institutional development.  The Bank will seek to help 
Iraq prepare and implement strategic plans in the critical energy, transport, and water sectors, as well as 
building the necessary capacity to plan and implement its own investments.  In the energy sector, this 
includes support for the Iraq National Energy Strategy (INES), as well as analytical work and technical 
assistance on policy, strategy, governance and institutional development in the power and gas sectors, 
including the upcoming Gas Master System study.  Under existing programs, the Bank will continue its 
work on the rehabilitation of Dokan and Derbandikhan and the Hartha Power Plants. Regarding transport, 
the Government has asked the Bank Group for help with institutional reform and capacity building for 
transport infrastructure management, particularly in terms of transport access in relation to trade 
facilitation, and customs modernization.  A transport sector master plan and strategy (including rail, 
road, air, and urban sectors) is under preparation, as well as identification of capacity building and 
technical assistance needs and an investment plan for the short, medium and long term.  In 
telecommunications, the Bank will seek to build on its successful engagement in Iraq through the ITF 
PSD project.  A follow-on technical assistance program is being explored, most likely as a reimbursable 
service.  In particular, the Bank could support development of various mobile applications, organize 
seminars and workshops to share international best practice, bridge capacity and knowledge gaps on 
various policy and regulatory issues, and play the role of honest broker by bringing all public and private 
stakeholders together on one platform to advance the telecom.  Gender-sensitive approaches to 
infrastructure programs will be pursued to enhance productivity, incomes, and provide more equitable 
access. 

81. 
IFC is well-positioned to mobilize financing to a number of projects in these key sectors as 
well.  IFC and MIGA will support South-South investments, particularly from existing clients interested 
in expansion to Iraq (e.g. from the GCC, Jordan, and Turkey).  Mobilization of additional funding from 
financial institutions, similar to what was achieved for earlier successful efforts to finance Iraq’s 
telecommunications backbone, will remain a key feature of IFC’s strategy. 

82. 
Sound management of natural resources and environmental protection are critical for Iraq 
to sustain its economic development agenda.  This includes supporting the development and 
implementation of a comprehensive national environment and natural resources management action plan 
that prioritizes environmental issues in national planning and budget allocation.  Priority areas include 
urban environment, rehabilitation of agricultural land, and water resources management.  A new US$140 
million Irrigation and Water Management/Water Resources Project is proposed for FY14: this project 
would build on the success of the existing Community Infrastructure Project and focus on the 
rehabilitation of irrigation systems, including efforts to rebuild local Iraqi water user associations.  The 
Bank also stands ready to bring to bear its expertise to help the Government address climate change 
issues, given Iraq’s high vulnerability.  The Global Gas Flaring Reduction (GGFR) Initiative has 
proposed US$1.4 million for Iraq GGFR work from 2013-15.  A Gas Pricing Study will be undertaken as 
well as the Gas Master System Study which aims to propose an overall strategy and an implementation 
plan for the development of the gas industry. 

 
Result Area 3: Improving Social Inclusion and Reducing Poverty 
CPS Outcome Areas: 
1. Improved delivery of health, education, and water supply services 
2. Strengthened capacity to develop, manage and monitor social protection reforms 

83. 

The Bank Group will seek to help the Government develop its capacity to deliver efficient 
25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
services in health, education and social protection, while also improving targeting mechanisms to 
deliver support to the most vulnerable.  Under existing programs, the Bank will support school 
construction and capacity building for teacher training and curriculum development.  The Bank has also 
supported the development of the National Education Strategy.  This work will try to provide a 
foundation for greater women’s participation in the labor force through education policy.  In the coming 
years, Bank support could include:  (i) capacity building for the implementation of the national education 
strategy by supporting the Government in developing an implementation plan and the design of priority 
programs; (ii) involving Iraq in global and regional initiatives, such as MENA Region’s Workforce 
Development (WfD) project under the System Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) and the 
University Governance Score Card (UGSC) 12; (iii) a policy note to take stock of the current situation 
regarding quality of education and skills development in Iraq using the newly available data from WfD, 
UGSC and other initiatives and incorporating the planned developments in the new education strategy 13; 
and (iv) skills development and readiness for the labor market.  

84. 
In health, the Bank Group will focus on improvements in management capacity and 
efficiency of the sector, following on the recent recommendation for a Public Expenditure Review in the 
sector.  In response to a request from the Minister of Health for assistance in the areas of building, 
expanding and operating emergency medical services and e-governance, the Bank will build on the recent 
experiences in establishing similar emergency medical services in Kurdistan through the Regional Health 
Emergency Response Project.  The Bank will continue to work in close partnership with the World 
Health Organization which has been working closely with the Ministry of Health (MOH) to support the 
Iraq Public Sector Modernization Program.  IFC, in turn, will work to identify viable investment 
opportunities in the health sector that enable existing health providers to grow and attract South-South 
investments in the health sector.   

85. 
In the water supply sector, the Bank Group would continue helping the Government 
prepare the analytical base for sustainable delivery of water services across the country, including 
an institutional and regulatory framework for the water supply and wastewater sector.  Under the 
existing portfolio, the Bank will continue to implement its programs of support for the rehabilitation of 
municipal water supplies, including in Baghdad.  A new Water Supply and Sewerage (Baghdad) project 
for US$100 million is proposed for FY15.  

86. 
Under the rubric of social protection, the Bank Group will continue its engagement in labor 
markets, poverty reduction, social safety nets, and pension reforms, building on the available data to 
allow for a deeper evidence-based dialogue on social protection reforms. The Bank could also support 
Iraq in implementing its National Employment Strategy.  The successful Household Survey work and 
ensuing Poverty Reduction Strategy are being followed up by an update of the Household Survey.  
Technical work will be carried out to assess Iraq’s social subsidies and will make policy 
recommendations to move Iraq beyond the universal Public Distribution System to a differentiated model 
that continues to protect the poorest and most vulnerable.  Additional policy development and 
implementation support could be provided on safety nets, such as conditional cash transfer programs to 
improve education and health outcomes among youth and women, and pensions, where significant 
capacity is being built at the National Board of Pensions (NBP) to help expand coverage beyond the 
current level of 20 percent of the population.  Additionally, the Bank is supporting a community-driven 
development approach to basic service delivery in the KRG and could expand this work over the CPS 

12 These initiatives will collect comprehensive data to provide diagnostic information on the system which can be used for further 
policy development and could lead to additional work to enhance employability of graduates and the relevance of the acquired 
knowledge and skills to the labor market. 
13 The policy note would lay the foundation for targeted support in the important area of skills development and students’ readiness for 
the labor market. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
period. 

87. 
The CPS intends to help the Government reach its medium-term objective of providing 
opportunities for women’s empowerment with equity and justice.  The Bank will carry out a Gender 
and Poverty Assessment in Iraq in FY14, informed by the Household Survey that will be completed by 
end of 2012.  This work will aim to mainstream gender into the poverty work to provide a full and 
comprehensive assessment and will inform the development of a National Gender Strategy.  The 
National Gender Strategy will focus on raising the status of women through the reform of economic and 
legal institutions to ensure equal rights and opportunities for men and women (family law, protection from 
violence, property ownership, employment, political rights and inheritance laws) with a view to reach the 
objective of achieving gender equity in power and resource distribution and to meet MDG targets by 
through continuing to promote women’s empowerment in productive economic sectors such as 
agriculture, water, and energy.  The gender assessment will inform dialogue and technical support on 
social protection reform to improve targeting and outcomes.  The gender assessment will also be used to 
inform policy dialogue more broadly.  The Bank will continue to work with the Government to establish 
the evidence base regarding the effects of gender equality in poverty reduction operations, build the 
gender-mainstreaming capacity of its clients, and partner with other stakeholders on gender equality and 
women’s economic empowerment.   
C.  
Implementing the FY13-16 Country Partnership Strategy 
88. 
Iraq’s complex political agenda, security challenges and global economic uncertainty imply 
that the Bank Group needs to be flexible, opportunistic, and ready to adapt to changing 
circumstances.  This strategy is a living document that lays out priorities for Iraq today but will need to 
be periodically reviewed for relevance in light of changing circumstances.  The Bank Group’s 
investment and analytical and advisory work programs will be reviewed with the Government through 
Country Program Reviews, and activities will be updated based on the Government’s emerging priorities 
and the quality of engagement with partner institutions.  

89. 
The Bank will seek to ensure that IBRD financing for Iraq during the CPS period leverages 
Iraq’s own resources and has strong government ownership and reform champions.  Iraq has 
considerable resources at its disposal for public investment, development and poverty reduction, but 
absorptive capacity remains low.  The Bank’s main comparative advantage will be in providing the 
underlying analysis for policy development and providing technical assistance to help build institutional 
capacity.  Available IBRD resources for Iraq are but a small fraction of Iraq’s annual investment budget 
(US$36.7 billion14 in 2012).  Thus, IBRD funding must be used strategically to leverage and provide an 
operating framework for the Government’s investment program and to provide knowledge transfer and 
good project practice.  In addition, and in light of Iraq’s own resources, it is expected that more Bank 
support will be carried out on a reimbursable basis as done in other countries in the region and around the 
world. 

90. 
Building on its global knowledge, the Bank will be offering a combination of lending and 
knowledge products to better meet the specific needs of Iraq.  Knowledge can be delivered through 
the entire spectrum of Bank instruments, including IBRD lending, just-in-time policy notes, sectoral 
strategies, reimbursable services and economic and sector work to inform the policy decisions and design 
of development programs. 

91. 
The portfolio will continue to be monitored closely, including by regular meetings of the JPOC 
and CPPRs.  Project supervision will continue to be carried out intensively and increasingly in-country 

14 Includes supplemental budget 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
when security permits.  Future Bank project support will be designed to meet more robust criteria of 
readiness for implementation.  Readiness criteria will be monitored in order to facilitate a quick start of 
project implementation, for example, the core implementation team being in place as well as prepared 
procurement plan and packages, and some contracts ready for signing. In order for the projects to begin in 
a timely manner, the Bank team will work with the Government to encourage timely project effectiveness. 

92. 
IFC’s investment program is expected to remain on an upward trajectory assuming 
continued improvement in the domestic security/political environment and sustained investor 
confidence.  With expanded field presence and business development efforts, investments during the 
CPS period will focus on exploring opportunities in sectors that generate employment opportunities (e.g., 
construction, manufacturing, tourism and services), as well as increased access to finance.  IFC will 
continue to implement its regional South-South investment strategy by partnering with larger MENA 
and/or Gulf investors interested in venturing into the Iraqi market.  Special attention will be given to 
focusing on lagging regions and reaching women with a view to improving the inclusion dimension of 
IFC’s program.  The implementation of the IFC Advisory Service program foresees a phased approach: 
interventions will be segmented and phased over the life of the program to ensure proper relevance and 
alignment with the prevailing situation on the ground. The objectives of the Advisory Services program, 
in line with national priorities and in coordination with other donors, are to support Iraq’s economic 
development, create new investment and employment opportunities and stimulate private sector-led 
growth.  Based on extensive consultations with the World Bank, donors, GOI and private sector 
stakeholders in Iraq, IFC will execute a targeted, multi-pronged private sector development advisory 
services program – in tandem with investments – with a focus on: (i) corporate governance; (ii) SME 
training though Business Edge; (iii) investment climate reforms (e.g. construction permits); (iv) 
implementation of PPPs and privatization support; (v) improvements in financial infrastructure and work 
with banks and microfinance institutions to increase access to finance to MSMEs; and (vi) supporting 
client- and sector- related sustainable business needs. 

Financing of the Program 

93. 
The expected indicative lending envelope is US$600-900 million during the CPS period.  
Actual lending will depend on demand from the authorities based on Iraq’s development priorities, 
performance under the CPS, and IBRD lending capacity.  The Bank is developing a reimbursable 
services program with Iraq: KRG has already indicated its intent to enter into a significant reimbursable 
services program with the Bank, details of which are currently being worked out.  During the CPS period 
FY13-16, IFC plans to continue investing in the private sector with an indicative program of US$100-150 
million in commitments per year assuming improvements in the security situation and an operating 
environment that is conducive to private sector expansion. 

Fostering Stronger Partnerships 

94. While donor assistance played an important role in the country’s reconstruction and 
development process, some donors are winding down their development assistance programs in 
Iraq. The multi-donor Iraq Trust Fund provided an excellent vehicle for donor cooperation in post-war 
Iraq and is an example of good practice in terms of transparency and donor reporting.  The Bank also 
engages in a mutually reinforcing dialogue with the authorities—together with the IMF—on issues of 
common interest.  Over the last few years, the Government has improved its capacity to manage aid in 
line with the signing of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness in May 2008.  This includes: the 
restructuring of relevant units in the Ministry of Planning in Baghdad and the KRG; training on project 
screening and appraisal, management, monitoring and evaluation; and modernization of information 
technology.  These efforts have gone hand-in-hand with the establishment and improvement of a Donor 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistance Database to capture planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of Iraq’s capital 
budget (domestic and external resources). 

95. 
Improving the efficiency, effectiveness, and delivery of development cooperation remains a 
challenge.  Ongoing security issues, together with the Government’s institutional capacity to lead on 
external aid, have impacted the achievements of reconstruction and development efforts.  This was 
further exacerbated by certain assistance programs that were not well-coordinated among international 
agencies and local communities.  These developments have made it particularly important for Iraq to 
develop strong and well-functioning institutions that can plan, allocate and oversee development 
resources in an effective, accountable and transparent manner.   

96. 
The Bank has established strong partnerships with Iraq’s development partners and will 
continue to play a key role in the coordination among Government and development partners.  
The key donors, in terms of volume of financial transfers, are the US Agency for International 
Development (USAID), the Japanese Government, the World Bank, the European Union, and SIDA.  
The International Partners Forum (IPF), jointly chaired by the World Bank and the United Nations 
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), meets monthly to discuss political and economic developments and 
to reach consensus for addressing them.  In addition to these high-level fora, sector groups coordinate 
development partner support in specific areas on the Government’s program.  The Bank also uses 
informal networking with key donor agencies as a means of coordinating its assistance program with 
other donors so as to ensure complementarity, and avoiding risks of overlap.  Finally, during the CPS 
period the Bank will continue to lead / co-lead groups on public financial management, governance, and 
private sector development and provide support to the Prime Minister’s Advisory Council on aid 
coordination and effectiveness. 

97. 
Iraq has a nascent but active CSO sector with over 200 registered CSOs. The most active 
CSOs are focused on governance, human rights, democracy, media, human development, women’s rights 
and the environment. A few CSOs are particularly vocal on budget issues, corruption and abuse of office, 
and the rights of displaced persons, widows and orphans.  Only a small number of the CSOs in Iraq have 
been established with strong governance structures and have developed close partnerships with local and 
international institutions in their field of operations. The Bank will continue to engage CSO leaders in 
dialogue and consultations.  

Strategic Communications 

98. 
A communication plan will be important for CPS implementation, both to provide 
information to stakeholders and to provoke public debate on development policy issues. To this end, 
many of the Bank’s projects and AAA work will support increased stakeholder feedback and 
involvement.  Many policies (for example, in social and health sector reforms) would benefit from 
deeper transparency and public participation on how implementation will occur and how reforms will 
impact the lives of citizens.  Therefore, the Bank will seek to scale up its communications on its own 
work, and assist the Government in doing so more broadly. This could, for example, include working with 
the Government and other partners to regularly host workshops and seminars around key policy issues for 
a wide audience, in addition to other fora, as well as making use of new interactive technologies that 
would allow a broader and more diversified reach. 

IV. MANAGING RISKS 

99. 
The CPS will be implemented during a period of considerable risk and uncertainty.  
Political risks feature most prominently, and these impact security.  The 2014 elections are an important 
milestone that could influence the ability of the Bank Group to deliver on the CPS program.  Tension, 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infighting, and conflict could become more pronounced as the election approaches, making reform 
increasingly difficult to accomplish.  Under these circumstances, it is important for the Bank to focus on 
what is possible, help sustain momentum within the Government’s economic development program, and 
build support for reforms across all parts of the coalition government as well as with civil society and the 
private sector.  Given the volatility of the political and security environment and the upcoming elections, 
the CPS will remain flexible and will strategically adapt its engagement to respond to the evolving 
situation on the ground.  The CPS Progress Report provides a good opportunity to make adjustments to 
the strategy if necessary, and the timing of its delivery can also be adjusted to respond to country 
circumstances.  In addition to these issues, and related to the political situation in the country, a lack of 
consultation and consensus within Government on policy reform may lead to fragmented and dissonant 
policy choices that that are not aligned with the Bank’s recommendations, and this could compromise the 
impact of the Bank’s strategy in Iraq.  The Bank will continue to make policy recommendations and 
provide technical assistance and access to best practice and international experience in order to inform 
policy making to the greatest extent possible.  However, these risks are difficult to fully mitigate, and it 
should be recognized that the Bank Group’s influence is limited. 

100. With its largely oil-based economy, Iraq is vulnerable to oil price fluctuations. The global 
economic crisis is putting downward pressure on oil prices and this could impact the Government’s ability 
to finance its budget from oil revenues. While Iraq should not (and is unlikely to) abandon its efforts to 
integrate more fully into the global economy, prudent macroeconomic management will remain key to 
providing the fiscal space for the Government to adjust appropriately to external shocks when they occur.  
The Bank will seek to help the Government mitigate this risk, including through policy advice. 

101. Another external shock that may impact Iraq is regional instability, including spillover 
from Syria which could jeopardize the whole region. Should regional instability spill over to Iraq, 
creating implementation difficulties for the Bank’s strategy, necessary adjustments to the program will be 
made and, if appropriate, the CPS Progress Report will be accelerated. Under such a scenario, IFC 
business development and ramping up of an IFC investment program would be difficult:  IFC would 
focus on portfolio management and engaging through its advisory arm on a selective basis. 

102. The Iraq program also remains subject to project management and fiduciary risks, 
including environmental and social safeguards aspects. In the current environment of political 
uncertainty and corruption, program-specific risks assume even greater prominence. In addition, the 
operating environment makes supervision challenging. To mitigate these risks, the Bank plans to continue 
providing training and to undertake risk-based supervision missions as possible to help build capacity and 
ensure that adequate controls are in place for financial transactions and accuracy in financial reporting, 
audit and disbursement.  A fiduciary monitoring agent carries out fiduciary control and physical 
verification activities with reporting to the Bank, and a portfolio specialist has been hired in Baghdad; 
however, risks remain in the implementation of Bank-supported projects.  To mitigate the safeguards 
risks, the Bank will provide training, close monitoring, and review the Environmental and Social 
Safeguards Assessment Framework.  In the event that political or fiduciary risks seriously undermine the 
integrity of the portfolio, appropriate measures will be taken.

30 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 1:  Iraq CPS Results Framework (FY13-FY16) 

Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (Tentative) 

CPS Results, Outcomes, and Indicators 
Results influenced by the WBG Program 
PILLAR 1:  IMPROVING GOVERNANCE 
Government’s Key Objectives: 15 
• Create fiscal discipline to strengthen efficiency; effectiveness and transparency in the use of public resources as well as aligning the budget with national priorities 
• Improve governance, in modernizing the public sector, strengthening transparency and accountability, and combating corruption 
Outcome Area 1.1:  Improved transparency and efficiency of oil revenue management and public spending 
1.1.1.  Iraq conducting itself as an Extractive 
• Issuance of two annual EITI Reports by 2014 
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)-compliant 
• Medium-term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) 
country 
incorporating prudent oil price and production projections 
  Baseline:  1 EITI report 16  
  Target:  4 EITI reports issued by 2016 and active 
participation of civil society in monthly IEITI 
Council meetings as evidenced by participation lists 
and noted by Validator 

Completed Activities: 
• Report Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) 
Phase I:  Oil Revenue Management for Economic 
Diversification  
• Public Expenditure Review  

On-going Activities: 
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Support 
(EITI); Public Financial Management Reform & TA 
(ITF); Second Capacity Building TA (ITF); Household 
Survey & Policies for Poverty Reduction & TA (ITF) 

Planned Activities: 
Integrated Financial Management Information 
Systems (IFMIS) (IBRD); Public Financial 
Management Reform/Governance (IBRD);  Local 
Governance/Fiscal Decentralization TA; Financial 
Management TA (Inspectors General); Poverty Gender 
Assessment ESW; KRG Procurement Reform (TA); 
Public Financial Management (TA) 

Ongoing Activities: 
Second Capacity Building TA (ITF) 

1.1.2.  Implementation of sector Public 
Expenditure Review (PER) recommendations 
focused on improved efficiency of public spending 
  Baseline:  None 
  Target:  At least two key recommendations 
implemented 

• Public Expenditure Reviews carried out in at least two key 
sectors (expected to be Water and Health) 
• New budget instructions approved and guidelines ready by 
mid-2013  
• Standard bidding documents finalized and used by the target 
ministries  
• Public procurement bulletin board (website) housed within 
Procurement Regulatory Agency established by 2013 

• Annual PRS monitoring reports with a focus on gender 
indicators using Household Survey data 

1.1.3.  Alignment of budgetary allocations with the 
national Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) 
  Baseline:  One poverty line item in yearly budget 
  Target:  Poverty mainstreamed in budget 
planning beyond a line item  
Outcome Area 1.2:  Achievement of one or more features of the Governance Action Plan  
1.2.1.  Governance Action Plan to achieve greater 
• Governance Action Plan approved by the Council of 
transparency, accountability, participation and local 
Ministers 

15 The Government is in the process of updating its National Development Plan. 
16 For year 2009, which reconciled about US$41b in revenue from oil and gas, validated in a timely manner. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CPS Results, Outcomes, and Indicators 
Results influenced by the WBG Program 
governance under implementation 
  Baseline:  Draft Governance Action Plan 
prepared  
  Target:  Achievement of one or more key 
features of the Governance Action Plan, such as the 
Access to Information Law 

Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (Tentative) 

Planned Activities: 
Public Financial Management Reform/Governance 
(IBRD); Public Sector Governance TA 

PILLAR 2:  SUPPORTING ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION FOR BROADLY SHARED PROSPERITY  

Government’s Key Objectives: 
• Diversify the economy through increased participation by other sectors in GDP, particularly the production, agriculture and industrial sectors, as well as tourism 
• Enhance the private sector’s developmental role, the partnership between the private and public sectors, and promoting an environment that encourages investment 
• Lay the foundations for the rehabilitation of state-owned facilities 
• Strengthen Iraq’s geographical presence as a link between East and West, and meet the demand for transit cargo transport by building an efficient infrastructure 
• Meet residential and industrial electricity demand and ensure efficient and effective management of electricity sector investment and operations 
Outcome Area 2.1:  Strengthened approaches to an improved business environment 17 
2.1.1.  Time taken to deal with construction 
• Reengineered (simplified) process of the Construction 
permits  
Permitting in Baghdad, Basra and Erbil, and capacity 
  Baseline:  187 days (Doing Business 2013) 
building for the agencies involved 
  Target:  To be determined as part of IFC’s 
Investment Climate Regulatory Reform 
intervention focused on construction permitting. 

Completed Activities: 
• Report CEM Phase I:  Oil Revenue Management for 
Economic Diversification  

2.1.2.  Strengthened capacity to restructure State 
Owned Enterprises (SOEs) 18  
  Baseline:  Time-bound Action Plan to 
implement strategy to reform SOEs 
  Target:  Implementation of time-bound Action 
Plan on track 

• Business Planning and performance contracts for Directors 
General (DGs) of each SOE by 2014 
• Establishment and operation of SOE Asset Valuation Unit 
within the Ministry of Finance by 2014 
• Recommendations of KRG Regulatory Capacity Review, 
including establishment of Regulatory Reform Unit within 
KRG Ministry of Planning implemented by 2014 
• Regulatory Capacity Review report for Basra Governorate 
by 2014 
• Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) with focus on improving the 
business enabling environment and gender issues 

IFC Ongoing Activities: 
Investment Climate Regulatory Reform Intervention 

Ongoing Activities: 
PSD Trust Fund with DFID, SIDA and US support 
(including support for the implementation of PPPs, and 
support for regulatory reform, including for Doing 
Business areas, sector specific reforms and advising 
Government of Iraq on how to improve draft 
legislation prepared by ministries; Regional ESW 
Economic Complementarity and Deeper Regional 
Integration: Iraq, Turkey and Mashreq) 

17 Outcome areas 2.2 and 2.3 on the financial sector and infrastructure as well as governance under Pillar 1, contribute to Outcome area 2.1 Strengthened approaches to an improved 
business environment. However, separate outcomes are included given the Bank Group’s support to these areas. 
18 Ministry of Industry and Minerals 72 SOEs; Ministry of Housing and Construction 8 SOEs including one pilot PPP; Asset valuation Unit in Ministry of Finance 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
CPS Results, Outcomes, and Indicators 
Results influenced by the WBG Program 

Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (Tentative) 

Planned Activities: 
Trade and Transport Corridors (IBRD); Country 
Economic Memorandum II ESW; Investment Climate 
Assessment (ICA) Reform TA  
Outcome Area 2.2:  Strengthened supervisory framework for financial intermediation and capacity of financial institutions 
Ongoing Activities: 
Banking Sector Reform (ITF); IFC Advisory Services 
for Improving Financial Infrastructure, microfinance & 
SME management training 

• Completion of Phase 1 of the Banking Reform Strategy 
Action Plan 

2.2.1.  Compliance by the Central Bank of Iraq 
with Basel Core Principles 
  Baseline:  No 
  Target:  Yes 

2.2.2  Public Credit Registry hosted by the Central 
Bank of Iraq functioning 
  Baseline:  Public Credit Registry does not exist 
  Target:  Yes (2016) 

• Development of a Public Credit Registry hosted by the 
Central Bank of Iraq (IFC) 

Planned Activities: 
Financial Sector Dialogue TA; Public Credit Registry 
Development (IFC) 

Outcome Area 2.3:  Strengthened infrastructure services 
2.3.1.  Improved clearance time of imports from 
• A Program to reduce trade and transport barriers along Iraq’s 
and transit trade via Turkey at Ibrahim Khalil 
main trade corridors and major border crossing with Turkey 
  Baseline and target:  To be defined during 
in place by end 2013 
project preparation of Trade and Transport 
Corridors (IBRD) 

2.3.2.  Number of beneficiaries from rehabilitated 
irrigation and drainage water services by mid-2013 
  Baseline:  0 
  Target:  52,750 (2016) 

• 97,000 hectares of improved irrigated areas by mid 2013 up 
from 70,000 hectares in 2008 
• 308,000 man-days employment created by 2013 up from 
111,400 (2011) in labor intensive works 

2.3.3.  Electricity/Energy:  Increased available 
generation capacity (MW) in power plants 
supported by WBG 
  Baseline:  410 MW (2012) 
  Target:  920 MW (2015) 

• Iraq National Energy Strategy (INES) being implemented in 
the oil, gas and electricity sectors, and influencing 
development of linked industries 
• Hartha Power Station Units 2 and 3 restored and Dokan and 
Derbandikhan hydropower plants rehabilitated by 2014 
• Gas pricing and gas master system design studies completed 
(in support of INES recommendations) 

33 

Ongoing Activities: 
Regional ESW Economic Complementarity and 
Deeper Regional Integration: Iraq, Turkey and 
Mashreq; Emergency Community Infrastructure 
Rehabilitation Additional Financing (ITF); Dokan & 
Derbandikhan Emergency Hydropower (IDA); 
Emergency Electricity Reconstruction (IDA/ITF); Gas 
Pricing Study TA; Integrated National Energy Strategy 
TA; Emergency Road Rehabilitation (IDA)  

Planned Activities: 
Trade and Transport Corridors (IBRD); Irrigation 
Water Management/Water Resources (IBRD); Gas 
Master System Study TA; Trade and Transport 
Corridors (IBRD) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Results, Outcomes, and Indicators 
Results influenced by the WBG Program 

Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (Tentative) 

PILLAR 3:  IMPROVING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND REDUCING POVERTY 
Government’s Key Objectives: 
• Reduce national poverty from 23 percent (2007) to 16 percent (2015) 
• Construct and rehabilitate intermediate and secondary schools in villages and poor neighborhood 
• Improve primary healthcare centers and accessibility by the poor and vulnerable 
• Improve the targeting and the efficiency of social safety nets 
Outcome Area 3.1:  Improved delivery of health, education, and water supply services 
3.1.1.  Health: Percent pregnant women receiving: 
• 12 primary health care facilities refurbished and equipped by 
(i) antenatal care at primary health care facilities in 
mid 2013 
Southern Iraqi Marshlands and Babil Governorate 
• Children age 0-5 years with health cards increase from 
  Baseline:  69.8% (2012) 
60.1% in 2012 to 95% in 2013 
  Target:  90% (2013) 

(ii) Iron Supplements 
  Baseline:  26.1% (2012) 
  Target:  50% (2013) 

3.1.2.  Education:  (i) Students benefiting from 
improved conditions of learning in new school 
buildings and classrooms 
  Baseline:  0 (2004) 
  Target:  72,688 (2013)  

  (ii) Number additional seats available, resulting 
from newly built schools to reduce overcrowding 
  Baseline:  0 
  Target:  32,640 (2014) 

3.1.3.  Water:  Number of people benefitting from 
rehabilitated water supply systems under WBG 
supported program (number)  
  Baseline:  0 (2005) 
  Target:  815,000 (2013)  

• Education Sector Strategy for education and higher 
education developed and launch by 2013 
• Trained curricula developers successfully produce 
Curriculum Evaluation Manual and Curriculum Authoring 
Manual by 2014 
• Data collection completed and a report produced for the 
University Governance Score Card by 2013 
• 20 master trainers and 120 trainers successfully trained (able 
to provide satisfactory training for teachers) by 2013 

• 10 rehabilitated water supply systems operational 

34 

Ongoing Activities: 
Second Emergency Primary Health Care Assistance 
(ITF); Third Emergency Education Project (IDA); 
Emergency School Construction & Rehabilitation 
(ITF); Institutional Strengthening & Capacity Building 
for the Education Sector TA (ITF); Household Survey 
& Policies for Poverty Reduction & TA (ITF); Youth 
Livelihoods Development in Southern Iraq (JSDF); 
Emergency Water Supply (IDA); Emergency Baghdad 
Water Supply (ITF); Emergency Water Supply, 
Sanitation & Urban Reconstruction (ITF) 
Planned Activities: 
Health System Strengthening TA; Capacity Building 
for the Implementation of the National Education 
Strategy TA; Water Supply & Sewerage (Baghdad) 
(IBRD); Water Sector Strategy (ESW) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Results, Outcomes, and Indicators 
Results influenced by the WBG Program 

Milestones 

World Bank Group Program (Tentative) 

Outcome Area 3.2:  Strengthened capacity to develop, manage and monitor social protection reforms 
3.2.1.  Social Safety Net Reforms:  Ineligible 
• Social Safety Net (SSN) Information System in place with a 
households excluded based on use of the central 
central SSN Beneficiary Database by mid 2013 
SSN Beneficiary Database  
• New targeting mechanisms and cash transfer methods in 
  Baseline:  0 (2011) 
place with better targeting of female-headed households (i.e., 
  Target:  57,000 (2013) 
CCTs) in place (mid-2014) 
• Pension administration information system designed by 2013 
• Social Security System is merged with the State Pension 
Fund, in terms of policies and benefits and is administered by 
the National Board of  Pensions by mid 2013 
• Agreed roadmap for reform of Public Distribution System 
(PDS) improved design and management of the PDS by 2014 

3.2.2.  Number of communities benefitting from 
CDD programs supporting core service provision 
  Baseline:  25 communities (2012) 
  Target:  100 communities (2014) 

• All Consultative Action Groups under CDD programs 
include 20% women and youth by 2014 

Ongoing Activities: 
Emergency Social Protection (ITF); Pension Reform 
Implementation Support TA (ITF); Rationalization of 
the Public Distribution System Reform TA (ITF); 
Consultative Service Delivery Program (Phase 2) 
(SPBF)   

Planned Activities: 
Social Protection Strategy (ESW) 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2:  Key Ongoing Technical Assistance (TA) Supporting National Strategies 

TITLE 

DESCRIPTION 

Public Distribution System (PDS) 
Technical Assistance Project 

Aims to strengthen the policy, management and administrative capacity in the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs and the 
Ministry of Finance to develop, manage and monitor pension and social safety net reform programs. 

Social Protection Technical 
Assistance 
Extractive Industries Transparency 
Initiative (EITI) Technical Assistance Assist client in EITI implementation, develop/strengthen institutions, and facilitate knowledge exchange. 
Household Survey and Policies for 
Data collection and strengthen the ability of the Government of Iraq to make and implement informed policies regarding 
Poverty Reduction Project 
poverty reduction, job creation and improvement of safety nets. 
Second Capacity Building Technical 
Provide capacity building and training to help authorities introduce medium-term policies, focusing on economic and 
Assistance Project 
public sector management and social safety nets. 
Strengthen GOI technical and institutional capacity to implement the rationalization of the PDS. In the short and medium 
term, the aims are to support: (i) the implementation of the initial phases of the PDS reform, making sure that there is 
coordination with the SSN, with special emphasis on targeting; (ii) the elaboration of the PDS public information 
campaign; and (iii) the design robust monitoring and evaluation systems. 
Aims to support the Ministry of Finance to develop a more effective accountable and transparent public financial 
management. 
Aims to support Iraq’s implementation of its Banking Reform Strategy and Action Plan, focusing on institutional, 
operational and financial restructuring of the 2 state-owned commercial banks, and strengthening of the regulatory 
supervisory functions of the Central Bank of Iraq. 
Aims to support (i) in the short-term, the GOI in implementing the provisions of the new Pension Law; (ii) in the 
medium-term, the unification of the public and private pension schemes; and (iii) in the long-term, the development of 
long-term old-age income strategy for Iraq. 
Aims to improve the ability of the Government to develop an energy strategy that is designed to increase the contribution of 
the sector to sustainable development. 

Public Financial Management (PFM) 
Reform Technical Assistance Project 
Banking Sector Reform Technical 
Assistance Project 

Pension Reform Technical Assistance 
Project (PRISTA) 
Integrated National Energy Strategy 
Technical Assistance Project 
(INESTA) 
Institutional Strengthening and 
Capacity Building for the Education 
Sector Technical Assistance Project 

Aims to support the Government’s effort to develop a sector strategy for education and higher education in Iraq. 

36 

 
 
 
 
Annex 3:  Consultation Report 

1. 
In preparation for the new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Iraq, the World Bank held 
several consultations in-country as well as through electronic media via the World Bank website to discuss 
the proposed strategy and to obtain feedback from various stakeholders. The initial consultations were held 
in June 2011 in Baghdad led by the Special Representative. The World Bank met with stakeholder groups, 
including Government agencies, representatives of civil society, and donor organizations.  The purpose of 
the meetings was to present the CPS preparation process, the overarching pillars of the Strategy based on 
the past three ISNs, and the current needs of Iraq as aligned with the National Development Plan (NDP), 
and to gain an understanding of the Government’s priorities and challenges. At these meetings, all 
stakeholders stressed the lack of skills following years of war and the need for continued capacity in all 
sectors.  They also stressed the importance of security without which all efforts for rehabilitation and 
development will fail.  All participants stressed the importance of transparency and accountability as the 
fundamental building block for recovery and growth. The extreme environmental degradation that Iraq has 
suffered following years of war was also highlighted in most meetings. 

2. 
Formal consultations were later held in May 2012 in Baghdad led by the Country Director and the 
Special Representative.  The World Bank met with a broad range of stakeholders from the highest levels 
of Government, including the Prime Minister, senior members of Cabinet, and Line Ministers, as well as 
representatives from civil society and non-governmental organizations, donors, local government, the 
media, and members of academia and private sector think tank organizations.  During these meetings, the 
World Bank highlighted the strategic thrust of the proposed strategy for Iraq for the next four years, 
focusing primarily on providing the technical assistance Iraq needs to plan and properly use its own natural 
and financial resources, design and implement institutional reforms needed to spur economic 
diversification and create jobs, and increase its capacity for service delivery. The Government’s message 
was clear that the priority for work with the World Bank is less about access to financial resources but 
mainly about the need to increase its own absorptive capacity which has been severely degraded after 
decades of sanctions and conflict.  Representatives of local governments, donors and civil society 
confirmed this view and stressed the need to accelerate priority services and promote private sector 
development in the non-oil sectors.   

3. 
A CPS workshop with Government representatives was held in Baghdad in October 2012, as well 
as further consultation meetings with the private sector, private bankers, media, academics, think tanks, 
and chambers of commerce throughout the country. 

4. 
The formal consultations also included field work led by the Special Representative in the 
Kurdistan Regional Government as well as the provinces of Al Basrah, Nineveh governorate, Dohuk, and 
Al Muthanna where the World Bank met with local governorate officials, civil society representatives and 
staff at three World Bank project sites.  The project sites included the Um Qasr Al-Zubair dual 
carriageway rehabilitation project, a component of the Emergency Road Rehabilitation Project (IDA 
US$135 million); the Hartha Power Plant of the Emergency Electricity Rehabilitation Project (IDA 
US$124 million); and the Emergency Water Supply, Sanitation and Urban Reconstruction Project (ITF 
US$110 million).   

5. 
In the city of Basrah, the largest city in Southern Iraq (population of 3 million) that produces much 
of Iraq’s oil wealth, stakeholders who were consulted (government officials and representatives of civil 
society) noted that oil does not produce jobs for ordinary people and that Iraq is having a hard time 
mobilizing oil money for restoring public services - particularly electricity and water.  In addition, the 
poor environment due to sand, dust gas flaring, and pollution from burning oil wells is causing a health 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
crisis, including an alarmingly high rate of cancer among children. 

6. 
From Basrah, the World Bank team travelled to Al-Muthanna via the Um Qasr Al-Zubair dual 
carriageway to Iraq’s poorest region where they witnessed first-hand the disastrous environmental impact 
of Saddam’s retaliatory policies on the marshlands.  Drained marshes were evident on either side of the 
road.  Al-Muthanna is the largest expanse of Iraq’s territory (20,000 sq. mi) but has a low population 
density (about 700,000 inhabitants) dispersed across a vast expanse of mostly desert land.  Many of its 
inhabitants are Bedouin nomads: the provincial council mourns the difficulties of establishing population 
numbers to justify building schools and health clinics, though they admit that there is a critical shortage of 
both.  Water is scarce, as are jobs.  The province is one among a handful of Iraqi provinces that are facing 
a perplexing social problem.  Women are leaving their husbands in droves and take up housekeeping with 
several children in tow but with limited ability to earn a living, given that educational attainment for girls 
counts among the lowest for Iraq.  Across the region, there is high degree of poverty evidenced by the lack 
of school infrastructure, water shortages, poor health indicators and many street urchins wandering about. 

7. 
Consultations were also held in Mosul, Nineveh Province. Stakeholders’ key priorities include: (i) 
support to agriculture, including drought resistant wheat seeds; (ii) health reforms; and (iii) remedying the 
lack of attention to local concerns by the central government. The Bank discussed the comparative 
advantage of the Bank in agriculture and put the focus on the agriculture ESW that is planned for FY15 
rather than direct financial support to agriculture. The discussion also focused on sovereign versus 
sub-sovereign lending and the fact that Iraq’s Governorates do not meet the minimum criteria for 
sub-sovereign lending. It was agreed that the Governorate would raise their needs for financial support to 
these sectors to the level of the Ministry of Finance.   

8. 
During these consultations, the Bank team discussed the proposed pillars of support, focusing on 
key priorities such as (i) strengthening Iraq’s economic management and fiduciary capacity; (ii) supporting 
private sector-led economic diversification and employment generation; and (iii) strengthening capacity to 
improve large-scale public service delivery.  The Bank also discussed modalities of support with key 
government officials, including the balance of lending and non-lending, i.e., analytical work, technical 
assistance, and capacity building.   

9. 
A consultation with the International Partners Forum was held on this CPS.  All donors consulted 
on the draft CPS confirmed that the Bank Group’s proposed strategy is the right one and is broadly in line 
with their own strategy.  There are working groups with donors on PFM, governance, water and 
agriculture, and partners meet on a regular basis and support each other's efforts in Iraq.  

Summary of Key Issues Discussed: 

10. 
Iraq is a large oil-based economy with strong upside potential, but has extremely weak institutional 
capacity.  All stakeholders stressed the erosion of skills following years of war and the need for reforms 
and continued capacity building in all sectors.  Although security remains a problem, the economy is 
picking up as evidenced by strong macroeconomic indicators, increasing export capacity, new oil 
contracts, and a construction boom.  As such, the country is benefitting from an increase in oil production, 
exports and oil prices.  These, however, do not translate to job creation or improvements in the delivery of 
basic services, and the distribution of wealth and opportunity remains unequal.  

11. 
Government officials broadly indicated that Iraq did not wish to borrow at high levels given their 
abundant resources. The Government also made clear that the priority for work with the World Bank is less 
about access to financial resources but mainly about the need to increase its own absorptive capacity which 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been severely degraded over the past two decades. Discussions with local level government 
representatives and civil society groups confirmed this view and stressed the need to accelerate the 
delivery of priority services, promote private sector development in non-oil sectors, and ensure inclusion. 

12. 
Against this background, the discussions with stakeholders evolved around the three pillars of the 
CPS and the key messages are as follows: 

• Economic Management and Governance:  All stakeholders echoed the need to combat 
corruption, establish transparency and build the foundation for long-term sustainable growth.  
There was a consensus among stakeholders on the urgent need for legal and regulatory reforms, a 
strong and stable financial sector, a robust governance framework, including a good procurement 
system, and strong auditing and oversight functions.  Members of the Government as well as 
donors highlighted the urgent need for better governance in the financial sector, particularly 
moving forward on the reform of the two state-owned banks, Al-Rafidain and Al-Rasheed. 

• Job Creation and Inclusive Growth:  Discussions centered on the critical need for economic 
diversification away from oil, creating the enabling environment for private sector development 
and job creation, moving from a central economy to a market economy.  Employment, especially 
for youth and women, is considered one of the major concerns of stakeholders at all levels.  Senior 
officials recognized that the large and fast-growing labor force and the absence of a dynamic 
private sector constitute serious impediments to addressing the critical issue of employment in 
Iraq.  Many stakeholders went so far as to note that Iraq’s medium-term political and social 
stability will depend on how the issues of jobs and inclusion will be addressed.  Some members of 
Government noted that Iraq is already working on developing upstream industries such as cement 
and petrochemicals, and is also looking at developing the agriculture sector, both to increase food 
security and to create rural employment. The World Bank responded that agriculture needed more 
analysis since it is not clear the extent to which it will generate employment and that it would 
require an integrated approach to water resources and land management, irrigation technology, 
financing and marketing and private sector participation. The Bank team recommended bringing in 
lessons of experience from other countries in this regard.  The World Bank also noted Iraq’s 
tourism potential as a possibility for creating jobs which could be explored as part of the analytical 
work under the CPS.   

• Basic Services Delivery of Economic and Social Infrastructure: Stakeholders consulted 
emphasized that in order to improve the quality of life of Iraqis, the Government needs to urgently 
deliver basic services in the sectors of electricity, water, transport, education, primary health, and 
social protection while strengthening the capacity of Government institutions to adequately 
manage these sectors.  As some donors and bilateral partners are in the process of phasing-out of 
Iraq, stakeholders requested World Bank support by identifying agents of change or champions in 
the Government to ensure that basic services are delivered. 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 

Annex 4:  Iraq Matrix of Donor Interventions 

Donor    Sector

A

g

r

i

c

u

l

t

u

e
r

D

e

m

o

r
c

a

t

i

c

G

v
o

r
e

n

a

n

e
c

E

u
d

c

a

t

i

o

n

E

n

r
e

y
g

E

n
h

v
a

i

r

o
g

n

m

e

n

t

&

C

i
l

m

a

t

e

C

n

e

G

e

d
n

r
e

H

e

a

l

t

h

P

r

i

a
v

t

e

S

c
e

t

o

r

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

R

a
o

d

s

&

T

r

a

n

s

p

o

r

t

S

o

c

i

a

l

P

r

o

t

c
e

t

i

o

n

U

r

b

a

n

a

d
n

L

o

c

a

l

G

v
o

r
e

n

m

e

n

t

W

a

t

r
e

&

S

a

n

i

t

a

t

i

o

n

H

u

m

a

n

i

t

a

r

i

a

n

H

u

m
m

a
o

n

R

i

g

h

t

s

&

P

o

i
l

e
c

R

e

f

r

s

G

v
o

r
e

n

a

n

e
c

/

T

r

a

n

s

p

a

e
r

n

c

y

Y

o

u

t

h

P

v
o

r
e

t

y

A

l
l

e

v

i

a

t

i

o

n

W

o
a

r

l

d

B
T

a

d
d
n
u
k
n

A

m

i

n

i

s

t

e
r
e

d

I

r

q

r

u

s

t

F

Australia
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
EU / JUSTLEX
Finland
France / AFD
Germany
India
Italy
Japan / JICA
Korea
Kuwait
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Turkey
UK / DFID
USA / USAID
World Bank
UN
World Bank 
Administered 
ITF

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X X X X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X X X X
X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X X
X X X X X X
X X X X X X

X

X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Note: This is a snapshot based on the Bank's c urrent know ledge of donor involvement in Iraq and w ill c hange over the c ourse of the CPS period.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5:  Iraq’s Progress towards the MDGs 

1. 
Iraq has made progress towards achieving some of the MDGs including reducing hunger, 
promoting gender equality and reducing child mortality. However, there is still much work to be done in a 
number of crucial areas including increasing participation in primary education, reducing unemployment, 
and ensuring access to safe and reliable water and sanitation. The gap in access to essential services 
remains wide especially between rural and urban areas. 19 

2. 
Iraq’s expected outlook to meet the MDGs is as follows (adapted from the World Bank’s “Global 
Monitoring Report 2011: Improving the odds of Achieving the MDGs” and the booklet “The MDGs in 
Iraq” published by the UN Country Team for Iraq): 

Goal 
1: Eradicate 
extreme poverty 
and hunger 

2: Achieve 
universal 
primary 
education 
3: Promote 
gender equality 
and empower 
women 

4: Reduce child 
mortality 

5: Improve 
maternal health 

6: Combat 
HIV/AIDS, 
malaria and 
other diseases 

Iraq’s expected outlook to meet the MDGs 

Status 
Far from target. The Government of Iraq is targeting a reduction in poverty levels 
to 16 percent by 2015 as part of its commitment to eradicate extreme poverty and 
hunger under MDG 1. Almost seven million Iraqis live in poverty (spending less 
than IQD77,000 per person per month, or US$2.20 per day), totaling 23 percent of 
the population. 
Close to target. Following the drop in the net primary school enrolment ratio from 
91 percent in 1990 to 89 percent in 2007, Iraq faces considerable challenges in its 
efforts to meet the 2015 target of 100 percent net primary enrolment. 

Far from target. Iraq remains generally on course for achieving gender parity in 
primary education enrolment. However, the lowest enrolment rates are to be found 
among girls in rural areas. Women’s share of wage employment outside agriculture 
fell from 11 percent to 7 percent between 1990 and 2008. Just 13 percent of Iraqi 
women participate in the labor force and 24 percent are illiterate. Iraq is targeting a 
50 percent share of non-agricultural waged work for women by 2015. 
Far from target. Iraq has made considerable progress in reducing mortality rates 
among infants and children under the age of five. The proportion of children dying 
before reaching the age of five has fallen from 62 to 41 for every 1,000 live births.  
Moreover, growing numbers of Iraqi children suffer from stunting (25%) 0-5 years. 
However, some central governorates – particularly Salah al-Din (70 per 1,000 live 
births) are significantly worse off than the rest of Iraq. Of the countries in the 
region, only Yemen has a higher infant mortality rate. Iraq is aiming to reduce its 
infant mortality rate to 17 for every 1,000 live births by 2015. 
Far from target. The proportion of women dying in child birth (maternal mortality 
ratio) currently stands at 84 per 100,000 live births, placing Iraq in a group of 68 
countries globally which account for 97 percent of all maternal and child deaths. 
Iraq is struggling to reduce the number of women dying in child birth (maternal 
mortality) to meet the target of 29 for every 100,000 live births. 
Close to target. The prevalence of HIV in Iraq is currently less than 0.1 percent of 
the population. New incidences of tuberculosis (TB) rose from 2 to 12 for every 
100,000 Iraqis per year between 2000 and 2006, pushing the country further away 
from the target of eradication by 2015. Southern and central governorates – 
particularly Qadissiya– experience the highest rates. Malaria is now almost 

19 UN Inter-Agency Information and Analysis Unit 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
7: Ensure 
environmental 
sustainability 

8: Global 
partnership for 
development 

completely eliminated in Iraq with no indigenous cases reported in 2009 compared 
to over 39,000 cases in 1995. 
Far from target. The proportion of households using an improved water source has 
remained at around 80 percent since 1990. In rural areas, this figure is just 57 
percent. Iraq faces considerable challenges in sanitation. 84 percent of the 
population uses an improved sanitation facility, like the public sewerage network or 
a septic tank. However, just 26 percent of the population is covered by the public 
sewage network, dropping to 2 percent in rural areas. While Iraq may meet the 
target of 96 percent of households using an improved sanitation facility, issues still 
remain over the lack of consistent water supplies, contamination of the water 
network due to damaged infrastructure and lack of wastewater treatment. An 
alarming 83 percent of Iraq’s wastewater is left untreated, contributing to the 
pollution of Iraq’s waterways and general environment 
Close to target. Use of new technology has increased rapidly in Iraq since 2003, 
with 78% of the population using a mobile telephone as of 2007. Personal computer 
ownership has risen to 12% while only 6% of Iraqis use the internet daily. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex A2:  Iraq at a Glance 

43 

 
 
 
 
44 

 
 
 
 
45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B2:  Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
As of September 30, 2012 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B5: Iraq Social Indicators 

Iraq Social Indicators

Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2005-10

POPULATION  
Total population, mid-year (mi l l ions )
    Grow th rate (% annual average for per iod)
Urban population (% of population)
Total f er tility rate (b i r ths per woman)

16.3
3.0
68.8
6.2

21.6
2.7
68.8
5.6

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
    Urban headcount index
    Rural headcount index

INCOM E
GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)
Consumer pr ice index (2005=100)

INCOM E/CONSUM PTION DISTRIBUTION

Share of income or consumption
Gini index
Income share held by low es t 10%
Income share held by highes t 10%

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Public e xpe nditur e

    Health (% of GDP)
    Education (% of GNI)

Ne t pr im ar y s chool e nr ollm e nt r ate
(% of age group)
    Total
        Male
        Female

Acce s s to an im pr ove d w ate r s our ce
(% of population)
    Total
        Urban
        Rural

Im m unizat ion r ate
(% of chi ldren ages 12-23 months )
    Meas les
    DPT
Child malnutr ition (% under 5 years )

Life e xpe ctancy at bir th
(years )
    Total
        Male
        Female

M or tality
    Inf ant (per 1,000 l i ve b i r ths )
    Under 5 (per 1,000)
    A dult (15-59)
        Male (per 1,000 population)
        Female (per 1,000 population)
    Maternal (per 100,000 l i ve b i r ths )
Bir ths attended by skilled health s taf f (%)

..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..

..
4.1

85
90
80

..
..
..

70
86
..

58
49
68

41
53

207
191
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..

..
..

74
78
69

80
97
44

80
74
10

71
69
74

36
45

157
101
84
54

32.0
2.5
66.5
5.0

22.9
16.1
39.3

2,380
171.0

0.309
4.0
25.0

3.0
9.0

89
94
84

79
91
56

73
65
7

68
65
72

31
39

281
125
63
80

M . Eas t
& Nor th
Afr ica

382.8
1.8
57.6
2.8

M iddle -
incom e

4,970.8
1.0
..
2.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

6,384
129

3,726
135

..
..
..

5.0
5.0

90
92
88

89
95
81

89
90
12

72
71
74

26
31

152
95
74
83

..
..
..

6.0
3.0

89
90
88

90
96
84

86
85
..

69
67
71

38
51

202
136
190
71

CAS A nnex B5.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in ser ies betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change f rom ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: ref ers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vacc inations bef ore one
year of age or at any time bef ore the survey .

47 

 
 
 
 
 
48 

CAS Annex B6:  Key Economic Indicators 

A ctual     
2008

Es t imate
2012

Pro jected
2014

Ind icato r

2006

2007

2009

2010

2011

2013

2015

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gros s domes t ic p roduct a
   Ag ricu ltu re
   Indus try
   Serv ices

100
5.8
56.5
37.7

100
4.9
54.4
40.7

100
3.8
56.5
39.6

100
4.4
42.5
53.1

100
5.0
44.9
50.1

100
..
..
..

100
..
..
..

100
..
..
..

100
..
..
..

100
..
..
..

To tal Cons ump t ion
Gros s domes t ic fixed inves tmen t
   Governmen t inves tmen t
   Private inves tmen t

..
..
..
..

66.0
17.7
13.6
4.1

49.4
33.4
31.4
2.0

91.5
27.2
23.7
3.5

75.4
28.3
24.5
3.8

63.2
24.3
20.5
3.8

71.2
24.5
20.4
4.1

67.7
27.1
23.4
3.7

64.4
27.7
23.4
4.3

63.5
28.1
23.6
4.5

Expo rts (GNFS)b
Impo rts (GNFS)

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

Gros s domes t ic s av ings
Gros s nat ional s av ings c

..
..

..
30.2

..
52.5

..
13.7

..
25.3

..
32.6

..
22.9

..
29.4

..
32.4

..
33.3

Memorandum i tems
Gros s domes t ic p roduct 
(US$ million at cu rren t p rices )
GDP per cap ita (US$)

..

56,987

86,531

69,188

84,078

114,227

127,792

146,569

165,091

179,751

1,926

2,845

2,215

2,624

3,478

3,799

4,260

4,695

5,006

Real annual g rowth rates
   Gros s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
   Gros s Domes t ic Income

..
..

1.5
..

9.5
..

2.9
..

3.0
..

8.9
..

10.2
..

14.7
..

12.0
..

9.3
..

Real annual per cap ita g rowth rates
   Gros s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
   To tal cons ump t ion
   Private cons ump t ion

..
..
..

..
..
..

47.7
..
..

-22.1
..
..

18.5
..
..

32.5
..
..

9.2
..
..

12.1
..
..

10.2
..
..

6.6
..
..

Balance of Payments (US $ mi l l ions )
  Expo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
   Impo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
  Res ou rce balance
  Net cu rren t trans fers
  Cu rren t accoun t balance

..
..
..
..
..
..
..

..
37,835
..
24,570
5,884
1,234
7,118

..
62,013
..
40,813
11,681
4,899
16,580

..
38,428
..
44,483
-14,349
5,053
-9,296

..
50,240
..
46,286
-5,111
2,593
-2,518

..
77,877
..
55,160
11,255
-1,720
9,535

..
87,145
..
71,097
1,065
-3,070
-2,005

..
101,254
..
81,615
7,322
-4,066
3,256

..
117,447
..
90,940
12,754
-4,976
7,778

..
129,805
..
99,513
14,928
-5,592
9,336

  Net p rivate fo reign d irect inves tmen t
  Long -term loans (net)
    Official
    Private

..
..
..
..
..
..

964
..
..
..
7,210
-11,872

1,822
..
..
..
74
-18,751

1,526
..
..
..
2,605
5,869

1,271
..
..
..
3,692
-6,295

2,095
..
..
..
2,330
-10,432

2,685
..
..
..
2,581
-7,373

3,183
..
..
..
-908
-4,310

3,526
..
..
..
-1,615
-4,780

3,887
..
..
..
-1,384
-6,730

  Other cap ital (n et , in cl. erro rs & omm ission s)

  Change in res erves d

Memorandum i tems
Res ou rce balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual g rowth rates
  Merchand is e expo rts (FOB)
    Primary
    Manu factu res
  Merchand is e impo rts (CIF)

..

10.3

13.5

-20.7

-6.1

9.9

0.8

5.0

7.7

13.7

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

 
 
 
 
 
Iraq - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Ind icato r

2006

2007

A ctual     
2008

2009

2010

2011

Es t imate
2012

Pro jected
2014

2013

2015

Publ ic finance (as % of GDP at mark et prices )e
  Cu rren t revenues
  Cu rren t expend itu res
  Cu rren t accoun t s u rp lus (+) o r deficit (-)
  Cap ital expend itu re
  Fo reign financing

Monetary indicators
  M2/GDP
  Growth o f M2 (%)
  Private s ecto r cred it g rowth (%)
  To tal cred it g rowth (%)

Price indices ( YR80 =100 )
  Merchand is e expo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e impo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e terms o f trade index
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

  Real in teres t rates
  Cons umer p rice index  (% change)
  GDP deflato r (% change)

..
..
..
..
..

31.9
43.6
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
35.1

78.9
55.0
..
13.6
..

37.7
27.9
26.9
29.8

..
..
..
..

..
..
6.5

76.7
55.7
..
31.4
..

33.8
29.5
67.0
32.9

..
..
..
..

..
6.8
31.8

74.5
74.8
..
23.7
..

60.5
30.1
16.5
16.7

..
..
..
..

..
-4.4
-30.1

72.8
57.2
..
24.5
..

63.6
32.9
..
42.8

..
..
..
..

..
3.3
25.2

78.1
50.0
..
20.5
..

53.5
19.5
..
58.2

..
..
..
..

..
6.0
29.4

73.3
57.2
..
20.4
..

..
..
..
46.9

..
..
..
..

..
7.0
2.4

73.2
51.3
..
23.4
..

..
..
..
29.3

..
..
..
..

..
6.0
-2.2

73.5
46.6
..
23.4
..

..
..
..
83.0

..
..
..
..

..
4.5
-0.3

74.0
45.9
..
23.6
..

..
..
..
49.3

..
..
..
..

..
4.0
0.7

a.   GDP at cu rren t p rices .
b .  "GNFS" deno tes " goods and non facto r s erv ices ."
c.  Includes net un requ ited trans fers exclud ing o fficial cap ital g ran ts .
d .  Includes us e o f IMF res ou rces .
e.   Cons o lidated cen tral governmen t .
f.  "LCU" deno tes " local cu rrency un its ." An increas e in US$/LCU deno tes app reciat ion .

49 

 
 
 
 
  
CAS Annex B7:  Key Exposure Indicators 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B8:  World Bank Portfolio 

51 

 
 
CAS Annex B8:  IFC Portfolio 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B8:  MIGA’s Outstanding Exposure 
(Gross Exposure, US$ million) 

As of end of fiscal year 

FY2004 

FY2005 FY2006 FY2007 FY2008 

FY2009 

FY2010 

FY2011 

Sectoral Distribution 
Finance 
Infrastructure 
Mining 
Oil & Gas 
Agribusiness/Manufacturing/Services/Tourism 

MIGA's Risk Profile 
Transfer Restriction 
Expropriation 
War & Civil Disturbance 
Breach of Contract 

MIGA's Gross Exposure in Country  
% Share of MIGA's Gross Exposure 
MIGA Net Exposure in Country 
% Share of MIGA's Net Exposure 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
0.0 

FY2012 
through 
2/29/12 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

3.7 
3.7 
3.7 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0% 
0.0 
0.0% 

0.0 
0.0% 
0.0 
0.0% 

0.0 
0.0% 
0.0 
0.0% 

0.0 
0.0% 
0.0 
0.0% 

0.0 
0.0% 
0.0 
0.0% 

0.0 
0.0% 
0.0 
0.0% 

0.0 
0.0% 
0.0 
0.0% 

5.0 
0.1% 
5.0 
0.1% 

3.7 
0.0% 
3.7 
0.1% 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- - 
- 
A L A N B A R 
A L A N B A R 
A L A N B A R 

A L  MU THANNÁ 
A L  MU THANNÁ 
A L  MU THANNÁ 

- 
- - 
MAYSAN 
MAYSAN 
MAYSAN 

- 
- - 
DIYALÁ 
DIYALÁ 
DIYALÁ 

BAGHDAD 
BAGHDAD 
BAGHDAD 

ARB IL - - 
ARB IL - 
ARB IL 

- N I N AW Á 
- - N I N AW Á 
N I N AW Á 

- - 
- 
DAHUK 
DAHUK 
DAHUK 

- - 
- 
BABIL 
BABIL 
BABIL 

- - 
- 
- - 
- 
AL QADISIYAH 
AL QADISIYAH 
AL QADISIYAH 

AN  NA JA F 
AN  NA JA F 
AN  NA JA F 

K IRKUK
K IRKUK
K IRKUK

SALAH  AD  
SALAH  AD  
SALAH  AD  
DIN 
DIN DIN 

- - 
- 
- - 
- 

  A L 
  A L 
  A L 
BASRAH 
BASRAH 
BASRAH 

- 
- - 
- 
- - 
DHI QAR 
DHI QAR 
DHI QAR 

KARBALA' - - 
KARBALA' - 
KARBALA' 

- 
- - 
WA S I T 
WA S I T 
WA S I T 

- - 
- - - - 
AS SULAYMANIYAH 
AS SULAYMANIYAH 
AS SULAYMANIYAH 

SS
S
aa
a
hh
h
aa
a

rr
r

''  
' 
aall  
al 

HH
H

iijjaa
ija
rraa
ra
hh    
h  

S y
S y
S y

r
r
r

i a n 
i a n 
i a n 

 D e
 D e
 D e

s
s
s

e
e
e

r
r
r

t
t
t

JJaa
Ja

bb
b

aall  HH
al H
Tikrit - - 
Tikrit - 
Tikrit 

aa
a

mm
m

rriinn
rin

EEuupphhrraatteess  RR..    
Euphrates R.  

TT
T

ii
i

gg
g

rriiss  RR..    
ris R.  

  TTiiggrriiss    RR..    
 Tigris  R.  

- - 
- 

- - 
- 

- 
- - 
Al Fallujah 
Al Fallujah 
Al Fallujah 

Nukhayb 
Nukhayb 
Nukhayb 

Ash Shatrah 
Ash Shatrah 
Ash Shatrah 
Al 'Uzayr 
Al 'Uzayr 
Al 'Uzayr 

Az Zubayr 
Az Zubayr 
Az Zubayr 

Umm 
Umm 
Umm 
Qasr 
Qasr Qasr 

Sinjar - 
Sinjar 
Sinjar - - 

Trebil 
Trebil 
Trebil 

- 
- - 
'Anah 
'Anah 
'Anah 

- 
- - 
Al Qa'im 
Al Qa'im 
Al Qa'im 

'Aqrah 
'Aqrah 
'Aqrah 

- 
- - 
- - 
- 
Zakhu 
Zakhu 
Zakhu 

Rayat 
Rayat 
Rayat 
- - - - 
- - 

As Salman 
As Salman 
As Salman 
- - 
- 

- - - - 
- - 
'Akashat 
'Akashat 
'Akashat 

Al Hayy 
Al Hayy 
Al Hayy 

Al Hadr 
Al Hadr 
Al Hadr 

- 
- - 
Al Hadithah 
Al Hadithah 
Al Hadithah 

Bayji 
Bayji - - 
Bayji - 

Kirkuk 
Kirkuk - - 
Kirkuk - 

Mosul Mosul 
Mosul 

Samarra' 
Samarra' 
Samarra' 
- 
- - 
- 
- - 

An Najaf 
An Najaf 
An Najaf 

Al Hillah 
Al Hillah 
Al Hillah 

Al Kut - 
Al Kut 
Al Kut - - 

Al 'Amarah - 
Al 'Amarah 
Al 'Amarah - - 

Ba'qubah 
Ba'qubah 
Ba'qubah 
- 
- - 

- 
- - 
- 
- - 
An Nasiriyah 
An Nasiriyah 
An Nasiriyah 

- 
- - 
As Samawah 
As Samawah 
As Samawah 

- - - 
- - - - - - 
Ad Diwaniyah 
Ad Diwaniyah 
Ad Diwaniyah 

- - 
- - - - 
Ar Ramadi 
Ar Ramadi 
Ar Ramadi 

 As 
 As 
 As 
- - 
- - - - 
Sulaymaniyah 
Sulaymaniyah 
Sulaymaniyah 

Al Basrah 
Al Basrah 
Al Basrah 

Karbala 
Karbala - - 
Karbala - 

Dahuk - 
Dahuk 
Dahuk - - 

Arbil - 
Arbil Arbil - - 

BAGHDAD 
BAGHDAD 
BAGHDAD 

Haji Ibrahim 
Haji Ibrahim 
Haji Ibrahim 
(3,600 m) 
(3,600 m) 
(3,600 m) 

T U R K E Y 

S Y R I A N 
A R A B 
R E P. 

K UWA I T 

J

O

R

A
D

N

S A U D I A R A B I A 

I S L A M I C 
R E P U B L I C 
O F I R A N 

Euphrates R.  

Razzaza 
Lake 

Tharthar 
Lake 

- - 
Habbaniyah 
Lake 

To Hims 

To 
Amman 

To Ad 
Damman 

To Ahvaz - 

To Dezful - 

To Kermanshah - 
- 

To Dayr 
az Zawr 

To Dayr 
az Zawr 

To Urmia 

To Urmia 

To 
Al Qamishli 

- 

36N 

34N 

32N 

30N 

28N 

3 6 N 

3 4 N 

3 2 N 

3 0N 

40E 

42E 

44E 

46E 

48E 

40E 

42E 

44E 

46E 

48E 

IRAQ 

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.   
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information 
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank 
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any 
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. 

0 

50 

100 

0 

50 

100 Miles 

150 Kilometers 

IBRD 33422R

APRIL 2012

I R A Q 

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS 

GOVERNORATE CAPITALS 

NATIONAL CAPITAL 

RIVERS 

MAIN ROADS 

RAILROADS 

GOVERNORATE BOUNDARIES 

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
