d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 67694-MA

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

FOR THE

KINGDOM OF MOROCCO

FOR THE PERIOD FY1O-13

May 15, 2012

Maghreb Department

Middle East and North Africa Region

International Finance Corporation
Middle East and North Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official duties. Its
contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate as of April 25, 2012)
Currency Unit = Moroccan Dirham
US$1 = 8.4 MAD
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA 
Analytical and Advisory Activity 
AFFI 
Arab Financing Facility for Infrastructure 
ALMP 
Active Labor Market Policy 
ANSA 
Arab Network for Social Accountability 
AWl 
Arab World Initiative 
CIP 
Contrat d Integration Professionnelle 
CCT 
Conditional Cash Transfer 
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy 
CPS PR Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 
CSO 
Civil Society Organization 
CSP 
Concentrated Solar Power 
DPL 
Development Policy Loan 
EBRD 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
ESW 
Economic Sector Work 

EU 
FDI 
FTA 
FY 
GDP 
HCP 
HR 
IBRD 
ICT 
IDF 
IFC 
INDH 

European Union 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Free Trade Agreement 
Fiscal Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Haut Commissariat au Plan [High Commission for Planning] 
Human Resources 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Information and Communication Technology 
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Initiative Nationale pour le D&veloppement Humain
[National Initiative for Human Development]

MDG 
Millennium Development Goal
M&E 
Monitoring and Evaluation
MFNA Middle Fast and North Africa
MFJ 
Microfinance Institutions
MICNT Ministry of Industry, Trade and New Technologies
MOF 
Ministry of Finance
MSMF Micro, Small and Medium Fnterprises
NGO 
Non Governmental Organization
NBFRC National Business Fnvironment Reform Commission
NPL 
Non-Performing Loan
OBA 
Output-based aid
PARL 
Public Administration Reform Loan
PFR 
Public Fxpenditure Review
PJD 
Parti de la Justice et du D&veloppement
[Justice and Development Party]
Public Private Partnerships
Program for Results
National Solid Waste Program
Private Sector Development
Quantitative Service Delivery Survey
Small and Medium Fnterprises
Solid Waste Management
Technical Assistance
Terms of Reference

PPP 
P-for-R 
PNDM 
PSD 
QSDS 
SME 
SWN 
TA 
TOR 

Vice President 
Director 
Team Leader 

IBRD 

Inger Andersen 
Simon Gray 
Eavan O'Halloran 

IFC

Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Mouayed Makhlouf
Joumana Cobein

The CPS Progress Report was prepared by a team led by Eavan O'Halloran under the guidance of Simon
Gray, with significant contribution by Bachir Abdaym. Other team members include Laila Moudden,
Micheline Faucompr6, Joelle Businger, Kathleen So Ting Fong, Gloria La Cava, Tara Vishwanath, Luis
Alvaro Sanchez, Fabian Seiderer, Jeffrey Waite, Nadine Poupart, Michael Hamaide, Will Stebbins, Dale
Lautenbach, Jonathan Walters, Abdelmoua Ghzala, Olivier le Ber, Santolina Savannet, Cedric Mousset,
Philippe de Meneval, Guenter Heidenhof Stefano Patemostro, Khalid El Massnaoui, Silvia Pariente-David,
Xavier Chauvot de Beauchene, Jaafar Saadok-Fria, Nandini Krishnan, Umar Serajuddin, Gabriella Izzi,
Julian Lampietti, Samia Melhem, Dorothee Chen, Patricia Veevers-Carter, 1btissam Alaoui, Anwar
Soulami, Andrea Liverani, Mohamed Medouar, Renaud Paubelle. For the IFC, Joumana Cobein and
Kaikham Onedamdy were the principal contributors.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Pages

I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

INTRODUCTION.............1................................1

COUNTRY CONTEXT.......................................... 
Changes in the Social and Political Context.. 
......................... 
Social Indicators, Gender and Youth................................ 
Recent Economic Developments.. 
................................ 
Macro-Economic Outlook........................................ 
Government Program.......................................... 

2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 

ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CPS.............. 
Progress in Achieving the CPS Objectives.. 
.......................... 
Overview of CPS Implementation.. 
............................... 
Lessons Learned 
............................................. 

3.1 
3.2 
3.3 

THE CPS PROGRAM GOING FORWARD 
.......................... 
Supporting More Ambitious Reforms................................ 
Preparing for Greater Consolidation of the Program... 
................ 
Lending Pipeline.............................................. 

4.1 
4.2 
4.3 

RISKS............... 
................................. 
Political and Governance Risks 
................................... 
Macro-Economic Risk 
......................................... 
Financing Risk.............................................. 
Institutional Capacity Risk...................................... 

5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 

...... 

ANNEXES:
Annex 1: 
Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 
Annex 6: 

CPS Results Matrix 
........................................... 
Macro-Economic Issues........................................ 
CPS Lending Program......................................... 
AAA Program............................................... 
Trust Fund Management........................................ 
Outreach Events - Civil Society Engagement.. 
....................... 

1
1
2
3
5
5

6
6
8
11

13
13
17
18

18
18
19
20
20

21
46
54
55
59
61

CPS STANDARD ANNEXES:
Annex Al: 
Morocco at a Glance............................................ 
65
Annex B2: 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management............ 
68
Annex B5: 
Social Indicators............................................... 
69
Annex B6: 
Key Economic Indicators....................................... 
70
Annex B7: 
Key Exposure Indicators........................................ 
72
Annex B8-1: Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants) 
............................. 
73
Annex B8-2: 
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio..... 
....... 74

KINGDOM OF MOROCCO
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY1O-FY13: PROGRESS REPORT

I. INTRODUCTION

1. 
This Progress Report assesses implementation of the joint Bank-IFC Morocco Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY10-13 that was presented to Board in January 2010. The CPS
focuses on three pillars: (i) growth, competitiveness and employment; (ii) service delivery to citizens; and
(iii) sustainable development in a changing climate. It was designed to be flexible and is firmly anchored
in the MENA Regional Strategy as well as the Arab World Initiative.

2. 
With the wave of change sweeping across the MENA region, the socio-political context of
Morocco has changed since the CPS was prepared. Morocco has experienced its own unique version
of the Arab Spring, characterized as more of an accelerated evolution rather than the revolutions and other
dramatic events in other MENA countries. Even before the Arab Spring, Morocco had already engaged
on a wide-ranging reform program and had other advantages that made it better placed to respond to the
calls from the street. Moroccans point to their long history as a nation, the steadying role of the
Monarchy, their own brand of moderate Islam and their business and social ties to Europe that
collectively set it apart from many of its neighbors. Nevertheless, many of the economic and social issues
that are at the core of the Arab Spring are also at play in Morocco-frustration of the population over
poor governance, social and economic exclusion, demand for dignity and voice, 
inequality and
unemployment. These challenges were accounted for in the CPS and are now more sharply at play than
ever.

3. 
This CPS Progress Report (CPS-PR) assesses the implementation of the Bank's program,
including the impact of the country changes. It confirms the importance of the flexible program that to
date has proven relevant to adapt to country circumstances and client demand, and, more recently, to
ensure alignment with the new Government's priorities. This flexible approach allows the CPS program
to be adjusted to respond to the new dynamic post-Arab spring context and the MENA regional strategy
of doing things differently, as well as to the Government's ambition to accelerate reform implementation.
In this framework, the CPS PR proposes areas of increased focus for the Bank's program including
growth, employment and competitiveness, governance, inclusion and voice, and subsidy reform.

2.1 Changes in the Social and Political Context

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT

4. 
The wave of protests that has swept the MENA region since the start of the Arab Spring has
enveloped Morocco, showing the powerful consequences of exclusion and high levels of youth
unemployment. Unemployment is the main social, political and economic issue. Morocco still has a lot to
do to improve its social indicators which remain relatively low compared to the MENA average (Box 1)
and it particularly needs to make major progress to address inequality and vulnerability. A quarter of the
population is considered living in poverty or under constant threat of poverty and Morocco's Gini
coefficient measuring inequality has remained high at 0.41 for the last 10 years. Moreover, recent
information on youth unemployment and women's lack of participation in the labor force is highlighting
how these two groups are excluded from economic opportunities. Less than half of the population aged
15 and over, and between 15-26% of women, participated in the labor market in 2010 (estimates vary
depending on the survey mechanism). The official unemployment rate is 8.9% but is three times higher
for the 15-24 age group. These conditions, combined with the push for greater voice and dignity as part
of the Arab Spring, provided fertile ground for frustration among the population.

5. 
Morocco's experience with the Arab Spring has been a reasonably peaceful one with well-
conducted demonstrations and only sporadic outbursts of violence. The social protests, known as the
"February 20 Movement", called for political change, a curbing of corruption and a more inclusive
development process. King Mohammed VI responded by proposing, in March 2011, a broad and
comprehensive package of political reforms that gathered the support of the population through a
constitutional referendum held on July 1, 20111. The new constitution sets the basis for a more open and
democratic society, provides mechanisms for the construction of a modem state of law and institutions,
and lays the foundation for extended regionalization 2. Transparent elections, held on November 25, 2011,
were won by the "Parti de la Justice et du Developpement" (PJD), a moderate Islamist party that had
traditionally been in active opposition and had seen its support increasing steadily in recent years. The
PJD won 27% of the vote, almost twice as much as the second largest political party. The discussions
among political parties that followed led to the formation, in early January 2012, of a four-party coalition
Government, with the head of the PJD Abdelilah Benkirane becoming the Head of Government.

6. 
Morocco's Arab Spring underlines its political distinctiveness in the region even though
many of the same grievances among the population exist. The changes wrought in the past year have
followed on the heels of other reforms already undertaken since the late 1990s. Successive national
governments have overseen an impressive political, economic and social transformation, with a marked
acceleration of reforms 
in recent years. 
Sound macroeconomic management has produced solid
foundations, and Morocco is on a recovery path from the stagnation of the 1990s. These gains, however,
did not provide total immunity to the rising tide of dissatisfaction and to the pressure from the outstanding
development challenges. The constitutional changes have resonated well, although the new governance
structure for the country is still to be tested. The country's experience has shown that Moroccans seem
more inclined to seek evolution within the system-gradual change that is continuous with the country's
history and religious values and that reflects the "social contract" in place. The election of the Islamist
party PJD showed that the population was seeking real and sustainable change while working within the
system.

7. 
The new constitutional mandates and the expectations of the population represent real
pressure on the Moroccan State for meaningful and quick change. While the people seem to be
willing to support the new government and its mandate, they are expecting and indeed demanding that the
new government break with the past and usher in more credible and faster reforms, notably in the areas of
job creation, governance and improvement in the quality of public services delivered. Morocco is thus on
the threshold of potentially profound social, political and economic transformation. 
If the new
Government can manage the expectations voiced by the population and genuinely deliver, then this will
go a long way to transforming the social and political landscape of Morocco.

2.2 Social Indicators, Gender and Youth

8. 
While there has been progress on improving social indicators and decreasing poverty, more
effective actions are needed to improve human development outcomes, especially for women.
Morocco lags behind regional neighbors and countries with comparable GDP per capita in terms of the
Human Development Index. The under-5 mortality rate of 30 per 1,000 live births and the maternal
mortality rate of 112 per 100,000 live births are amongst the worst in MENA. The status of women needs
to be addressed more comprehensively and with greater commitment in order to ensure real impact on

' The vote in favor of the proposed reforms was 98.5 percent with a participation rate of 73 percent
2 The new Constitution proposes the strengthening of the role of Parliament through greater oversight powers, elevates the Prime Minister status
to Head of Government, confirms that the King must appoint the Head of Government from the party winning the largest number of seats in the
election, enhances the independence of the judiciary, and establishes institutions for human rights, anti-corruption, integrity, and the
Competitiveness Council. It also establishes advanced regionalization as a democratic and highly decentralized system of governance.

2

women's lives. In particular, Morocco needs to bring about significant change in the way social services
are delivered and target better those services that have a greater benefit to women (e.g. addressing the
high maternal mortality rates, high women's illiteracy, and very low female labor force participation).

Box 1: Poverty & Social Indicators
* Absolute poverty has decreased sharply from 15.3% to 9% between 2001 and 2007 although economic vulnerability
(near-poverty) remains widespread meaning that a quarter of the population - 8 million people - remains either in
absolute poverty or under constant threat of poverty. Moreover, the partial closure of the rural-urban gap has not
cancelled entrenched disparities: 70% of poverty in Morocco is still rural. In 2007, the urban poverty rate was 4.8%
compared to 14 .5% in rural areas. (HCP latest data, more recent poverty data is not yet fully validated)
* An absolute majority among the poor are working poor: almost 70% of the poor are employed in just two sectors -
agriculture and construction - which are characterized by informality. Morocco's labor female force participation rate
is one of the lowest in MENA - around 15 -2 6 %. (WB sources, figures depend on the survey mechanism)
* Inequality has remained high and even increased in both urban and rural areas, and growth for the poor was slower
than the average growth and it was still below the levels needed to reduce poverty by half in 20 years. (HCP latest data)
* There has been a remarkable increase in access to education, but overall illiteracy rates and gender disparity in access
to secondary education remain very high. Around 44 % of the total population, 5 2 .7% of women and 7 2 % of rural
women are illiterate. In rural areas, only 40 to 5 0 % of first graders complete the 6 years of primary school, with
significantly lower rates for girls. Both education quality and learning outcomes lag significantly behind those of other
countries with similar income levels. (Ministry of Education data)
* Levels of infant and maternal mortality remain high, particularly in rural areas. Lack of adequate local health
facilities, combined with poor roads and expensive transport, particularly hurt rural women. Large disparities exist: 92%
of births were attended by skilled health personnel in urban areas versus 5 5% in rural areas (DHS 2010-2011).

9. 
Morocco is far from achieving the MDG relative to full and productive employment and
decent work for women and young people. Youth (aged 15 to 29) make up 30% of the population and
44% of the working age population (aged 15 to 64), but have been largely excluded from the sustained
economic growth the country has experienced in the last decade. Though the youth unemployment rate is
high, averaging about 22% among males and 38% among females3 , it only provides a partial picture of
young people's exclusion from economic life. Gender disparities in employment are glaring in all age
groups. In 2009-2010, a World Bank Household and Youth Survey4 estimated that close to 90% of young
women and about 40% of young men who were not in school were either unemployed or out of the labor
force, suggesting that progress in educational attainment has not translated into effective transitions to the
labor market. In addition, the bulk of unemployed youth have little or no education: almost 80% have less
than secondary education (or no education at all). Young men and women who do work widely report
holding poor-quality jobs, often working without job security or benefits (about 88% of employed youth
work informally without a contract), being underemployed (especially in the informal sector, where many
jobs are temporary or part-time), and having poor working conditions.

2.3 Recent Economic Developments 5

10. 
Despite the regional upheaval and global economic slowdown, Morocco's economy has
performed relatively well during the CPS period, and remained resilient in 2011. 
It grew at an
estimated 4.8 percent in 2011, recovering from 3.7 percent in 2010. The main drivers of growth have been
domestic private consumption (up 6.5%) and total investment (up 4.5%). Unemployment slightly
decreased to 8.9% due to dynamism of the services and construction sectors. Debt declined steadily from
62% in 2005 to 50.3% of GDP in 2010, before increasing to 52.9% of GDP in 2011. The Government
and the central bank showed continued commitment to control inflation through prudent monetary policy,
but also through the key policy of subsidizing basic food and fuels. Inflation was low in 2011 (0.9%), the
same as 2010, but much less than the average of the last 5 years (1.9%).

3 Note that the unemployment rate refers to the ratio of unemployed young people and young people who are in the labor force.
4 Kingdom ofMorocco: Promoting Youth Opportunities and Participation, World Bank, 2012.
See Annex 2 for full details on economic developments

3

11. 
However, data on budget execution for 2011 show that the budget deficit has reached
around 6.8% of GDP, much higher than the targeted 3.5 percent set by the Budget Law 2011 and
achieved in 2010 (Table 1). Public expenditure faced significant pressure to address the grievances being
voiced on the street by the population and to respond to the impact of the international economic crisis.
In addition to the implementation of a public wage rise in early 2011, the high deficit is mainly explained
by increasing subsidy expenditures due to high world prices of food and fuels (they were 80% higher in
2011 than in 2010). Subsidies, at 6% of GDP, now represent the most serious contingent liability on
public finances. The deficit would have been much higher without the measures undertaken by the
government to improve tax revenues and reduce non-priority recurrent expenditures. A major priority of
the new Government's program is to bring down the cost of the subsidy system.

Table 1- Subsidies in percent of GDP

In % of GDP 
Food 
Fuels 
Total Subsidies 

2007 
1.0 
1.7 
2.7 

2008 
1.1 
3.5 
4.6 

2009 
0.7 
1.1 
1.7 

2010 
0.7 
2.9 
3.6 

2011
0.9
5.1
6.0

12. 
The trade deficit deteriorated over 2011, from 19.5% 
in 2010 to 23.1% in 2011, due mainly
to the increasing world prices of food and fuels. The performance of exports continued to be lackluster
with volumes stagnating 
in 2011, 
reflecting 
their low diversification and 
the overall 
lack of
competitiveness of the Moroccan economy. The current account deficit also deteriorated, from 4.5% of
GDP in 2010 to 8% in 2011; foreign exchange reserves also decreased but remain at acceptable levels.
The current account deficit would have been even higher without the good evolution of worker
remittances (up 7.6%) and of tourism receipts (up 4.8%). Net international reserves remain at a
comfortable level of 5.1 months of imports of goods and services.

13. 
FDI inflows were good and averaged 4.5% of GDP over the last five years. While gross
investment had increased rapidly in the 2000s, to reach a rate of 38% of GDP in 2008, it receded to
around 35% of GDP in 2010. 
Investment has been characterized by confidence with a strong
participation of the private sector and State-Owned Enterprises with a share of 63% of the total.
Morocco's "investment grade" rating, gained in 2007 from Fitch, was confirmed in 2009. In March 2010,
it received the "Investment grade" again from Standard & Poor (BBB- with stable outlook). 
In
September 2010, Morocco successfully completed a ten year bond issue for one billion Euros against a
total demand of over Euro 2.2 billion, further attesting to international markets confidence in Morocco's
macroeconomic stability.

14. 
However, overall growth outcomes 
in Morocco have not been commensurate with the
investment effort, suggesting that the continued lack of competitiveness in the economy, poor
productivity improvements and existence of monopolies, cartels and special interests create deep-
rooted inefficiencies that hamper actual growth performance. As noted above, Morocco's reforms
and sector strategies of the past few years have resulted in high investment rates but outcomes have not
yet fully materialized in line with what could be expected from such a high rate and there were limited
productivity improvements. According to international experience, reaching and sustaining annual GDP
growth above 6% requires not only growing investment but also sizable productivity gains. Growth by
mid-2012 is decelerating and the room for Morocco to respond to legitimate social aspirations, including
those that emerged from the Arab spring, may be narrowing in the near term. 
In this environment,
Morocco will need to rely more extensively on fundamental reforms of its economy than on additional
spending to bring about higher growth that will create more jobs and achieve its development aspirations.

4

2.4 Macro-Economic Outlook

15. 
Morocco has shown good capacity to manage external shocks and its prudent macro-
management and sustained reform measures have positioned it better than other countries in the
region. The Government's approach is to build consensus on macro-economic management which has
proved effective and reassuring, and its track record on implementation has been strong. These factors
have allowed Morocco's economy to remain resilient despite the regional upheaval and global economic
slowdown. Nevertheless, Morocco is facing a difficult macro-economic context, with some factors
beyond its control. Stagnation in Europe in 2012 and slow recovery thereafter is expected to negatively
impact Morocco's exports and thus growth. Current 2012 forecasts indicate that growth may also be
adversely affected by the agricultural sector (suffering from drought) which accounts on average for about
15% of GDP. The growth rate is expected to reach around 3% in 2012 before improving to about 5% in
20146. This is predicated on the Government sustaining and accelerating the reform momentum, thus
consolidating economic diversification, growth potential, and domestic demand.

16. 
Morocco has recognized that the subsidy system is the main threat to the overall macro-
economic framework, especially in the face of sustained high international prices of food and fuel.
The Government's plan is to decrease the budget deficit in 2012 to 5.1% of GDP, by incorporating
specific measures to contain public spending, further advancing the fiscal reform agenda and increasing
revenues, and starting reform of the subsidy system. The expected fiscal deficit in 2012 of 5.1% is
considered prudent, in the sense that it recognizes that subsidy expenditures will likely remain high in the
short-term because reform of the subsidy system will be complex and take a long time. However, in
parallel, the Government's efforts on fiscal control should assist in decreasing the overall deficit. The
Government's goal is for the budget deficit to converge gradually to the stated objective of 3% of GDP by
2015-16 as reforms are implemented. Even in the face of external difficulties, the fiscal stance is expected
to remain sustainable over the medium term.

17. 
The external position is expected to remain sustainable over the medium term. The current
account deficit is likely to stabilize in 2012 at 6.9 % of GDP and progressively edge down to around 4.5%
of GDP in 2016, as the impact of reforms and sector strategies take hold. Balance of payments financing
requirements are manageable given the good economic fundamentals, the country's relatively low
external debt stock, and still adequate foreign reserves. Additional external lending is consistent with
prudent debt management and a recent comprehensive public debt sustainability analysis by the World
Bank indicates that the framework remains sustainable. Sound monetary and budget policies will help
maintain inflation at around 2%. In sum, Morocco's macro-economic framework remains adequate and
sustainable in the medium term. The economic effects of the global uncertainty and the Arab Spring have
been muted by good fundamentals and by the Government's current response which is supporting
investors' confidence and domestic demand. If compared to the 2008 crisis, the Government has today
less margin to maneuver. Nevertheless, its commitment to increase and expand reform efforts supports
the current positive view on macroeconomic prospects.

2.5 Government Program

18. 
The PJD election platform emphasized anti-corruption and set out policy proposals to
deliver on good governance, justice, revamping the delivery and quality of social services and
improving people's economic inclusion. As part of its mandate, the new Government is charged with
implementing the changes in the new Constitution as regards putting in place a new more decentralized
system based on separated, balanced and complementary powers. In particular, the new Constitution
reinforces the principles of good governance, human rights, protection of individual freedoms, as well as

6 Projections are based on the World Bank Global Economic Prospects 2011 key forecasts.

5

more responsibility and accountability for institutions. These issues are all central to the Government's
2012-2016 program, as declared by the Head of Government Abdelilah Benkirane in January 2012,
although many specifics of reform programs have not yet been fully articulated. It is expected that the
program will be further articulated going forward, relying on the continued implementation of programs
already underway, and launching accelerated programs in priority areas such as subsidy reform.

19. 
The governance reform focus will be on reform in the delivery of public services, access to
information, 
reform of 
fiscal 
system, budget 
reform, advanced 
regionalization 
(i.e.
decentralization), and a profound reform of the justice sector. Social solidarity, participation and
inclusion are all emphasized with a special focus on youth and families. Improving the transparency of
economic and financial governance is given particular mention with a strengthening of the competition
counsel and improving governance of state-owned enterprises. Human development is prioritized in the
program. The importance of fulfilling the goals of the Education Emergency Plan - adopted in 2009 - is
highlighted, especially as regards promoting good governance and the quality of teaching. For the health
sector, reducing infant and maternal mortality in order to achieve the MDGs is the main priority, as well
as improving the quality of services across the health sector. Supporting the National Initiative for
Human Development (known by its French acronym INDH) is also a key element of the plan, as is the
need for addressing other social issues such as focusing on women, youth and disadvantaged people.

20. 
Key areas of priority on the economic front include strengthening the competitiveness of the
economy, improving the investment climate, support to SMEs, and encouraging exports. To reach
the goal of reducing the unemployment rate to 8% by 2016, the Government program will continue
support to employment creation programs undertaken to date and introduction of new programs to insert
the unemployed into businesses and associations. Social assistance is also being pursued as part of a
broader and more comprehensive overhaul of the social protection and subsidy system. Perhaps the most
ambitious aspect of the Government's program is its objective to bring down the cost of the subsidy
system which is not only costly, but also inefficient as it benefits mainly the non-poor population. The
new Government's plan sets as a priority a full reform of the overall system and the design of a new
social protection model that is more cost effective and better targeted.

III. ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CPS

3.1 Progress in Achieving the CPS Objectives

21. 
The CPS has been implemented broadly as expected and the program is on track to deliver
on the majority of the foreseen outcomes. The CPS flexible design has proven adequate to remain
aligned with the Government's program and allow for adaptation to events. The CPS has 19 program
areas which were, at the time of CPS preparation, recognized as being at different stages of development.
The evaluation of the Bank's program towards achievement of the CPS objectives is assessed as broadly
on track as supported by the full stock-taking of results achieved and progress towards indicators in the
results matrix (Annex 1), and on the mobilization of the IBRD program. The results matrix already
shows either full achievement of, or at least good progress towards, milestones and outcomes for many
sectors. This is summarized in Table 2 where "Substantially Achieved" refers to those areas where
targets and milestones have been almost fully achieved already, "On Track" refers to those areas where
progress is on track to meet targets and milestones by the end of the CPS period, and "Off Track" refers
to those areas where the Bank's program has not evolved as expected and hence the results area is being
dropped. The Bank's engagement remains strong in those areas already defined at the time of the CPS
and has been firmed up or is growing - sometimes significantly - in the areas under development at that
time. The Bank's program has engaged in all of the results areas, albeit at different levels depending on
the maturity of reforms and sectoral programs.

6

Table 2: Progress in Achieving the CPS Objectives and Main Activities

Program Areas Targeted 

Progress 
towards

Objectives

Main Activities Undertaken

Business Environment 
Financial Sector Reform 
Skills & Employment 
Justice Sector Reform* 
Trade & Competitiveness* 

ICT* 

Pillar 1: Growth, Competitiveness, Employment
AAA, new DPL in Competitiveness, IDF grant, IFC
AAA, DPL Financial Sector, TFC
AAA, new DPL in Skills/Employment
AAA, new Judicial Performance Enhancement Project
AAA, new DPL in Competitiveness, IFC

AAA, DPL Public Administration

Pillar 2: Service Delivery to Citizens

Public Sector Management 
Quality & Access in Education 
Health Sector Reform 
Vulnerability & Social Exclusion 
Transport 
Agricultural Sector Reform 

Social Protection Reform 

Leveraging PPPs* 

AAA, DPL Public Administration
AAA, DPL Education, Tayssir CCT pilot
AAA
AAA, 1NDH 1
AAA, Rural Roads Projects, DPL Urban Transport
AAA, DPL Plan Maroc Veit, Rainfed Agriculture Project
AAA, Tayssir CCT pilot
AA 
uarzazate Project, DPL-2 Solid Waste, FC
Pillar 3: Sustainable Development in a Changing Climate

Water Management 

I~ 

-

AAA, Investment Projects in Water & Sanitation, DPL Plan

Maroc VeAA 

, OBA urban water supply/sanitation

Low Carbon Energy 
Solid Waste Management 
Climate Change Adaptation* 

AAA, IBRD and CTF Ouarzazate Solar Power Project, FC
AAA, DPL 2 Solid Waste Sector, Carbon Finance Program
AAA, GEF Project Integrating Climate Change Plan Maroc Vert
Cross-Cutting Beams - Governance and Territoriality

Public Expenditure 
Institutional Development 

Governance in Service Delivery 

Use of Country Systems 

Strengthen Local Government 

AAA, DPL Public Administration,
AAA, DPL Public Administration, DPL-2 Solid Waste, DPL
Urban Transport, DPL Plan Maroc Vert, new DPL
Competitiveness, IFC corporate governance program
AAA, DPL Education, DPL Solid Waste, DPL Urban Transport,
DPL Plan Maroc Vert, new DPL Skills & Employment
AAA, IDF Procurement, Preparation of Program For Results
INDH 2, Carbon Finance Program for Solid Waste
AAA, INDH 1, DPL-2 Solid Waste, DPL Urban Transport, DPL
Education, DPL Public Administration
AAA, Rural Roads Projects, Projects in Water & Sanitation

Spatially Inclusive Development 

4 

*Program Areas that were under development at the time of the CPS and for which no specific results matrix was prepared (with the exception of
Climate Change Adaptation)

Substantially 
achieved 

On track to be 

achieved

Of-rc

22. 
The changes in the results matrix going forward reflect both the pace of implementation
progress as well as the emphasis of the new Government and the Bank's program. In some areas,
the program did not follow the expected evolution as regards instruments and timing of lending. For
example, the health sector engagement didn't evolve as planned due to the Ministry of Health's choice
not to engage the Bank in support of the health agenda, and this area is thus dropped from the results
matrix. The engagement in Competitiveness has proven to be a key element of the Bank's support so a

7

new results area was added to capture this. The Skills and Employment and the Social Protection results
areas were fine-tuned to align better with the actual delivery of the Bank's program. The text of the
matrix indicates clearly where each program result area has been revised to reflect the current status of
engagement, where priority areas and results were added or fine-tuned, and where additional indicators
(vulnerability, exclusion and gender aspects) were introduced.

3.2 Overview of CPS Implementation

23. 
IBRD lending commitments slightly exceeded the anticipated envelope. The CPS proposed
an annual IBRD lending envelope of US$600 million. Since then, IBRD commitments to Morocco will
have averaged about $642 million per year across the FY10-12 period: they reached record levels in FY10
at $729.5 million, $480.3 million in FY11 and are expected to be $716 million in FY12. Including the
FY12 deliveries to be approved, the Bank will have delivered 7 DPLs, 7 investment projects and 1
Program For Results (P-for-R) in the FY1O-12 period (Annex 3). In addition, the Bank's Analytical and
Advisory Activities (AAA) program is broadening and deepening the knowledge base in critical areas
(Annex 4), thus informing sector reforms and the preparation of new DPLs and investment programs in
many areas. The approach of the Bank has been to carry out AAA and dialogue/advocacy in many
sectors before building up the engagement to IBRD financing once the reform program is in place, and
sectoral programs are well designed with relevant objectives and indicators. Pursuing several DPLs at
once has also allowed the Bank to provide much deeper support to a broader range of reforms than would
have been the case had several sectors been bundled into multi-sectoral DPLs.

24. 
At the same time, the level of disbursements has reached record levels. The increased
availability of financial resources during a period of tight financial markets has been a major achievement
of the World Bank Group. The Bank's IBRD disbursements have reached record levels - in the 2011
calendar year (the budget year for Morocco) over $710 million was disbursed by IBRD, of which $600
million was in budget support. This was a sizeable increase over calendar year 2010 disbursements that
were $270 million (2008 and 2009 disbursements were each about $240 million). Given the expected
concentration of DPLs in the IBRD pipeline for calendar year 2012, and assuming satisfactory program
performance, the Bank can expect to deliver at least the same level of disbursements in the Government's
2012 budget year as were achieved in 2011. These high disbursements are due mainly to the delivery of
DPLs as the investment lending portfolio continues to disburse slowly (see paragraph 26).

Box 2: Ouarzazate Solar Power Project - using energy resources to improve competitiveness and create jobs

The Ouarzazate I Concentrated Solar Power Plant (CSP) Project supports the development of the 500MW solar power
plant through a PPP. This is the first project of the Morocco Solar Plan and is supported by $200 million from IBRD and a
CTF allocation of $197 million ($100 million of this CTF channeled through the African Development Bank and $97
million through the World Bank). The MENA CSP initiative, a $5.6 billion program that finances CSP deployment across
the region, is one of the programs under the New Partnership for Inclusive Growth in the MENA Regionl| launched at the

G8 summit in Deauville in May 2011. The overall objective is to help bring down the global costs of CSP technology,

through economies of scale and learning effects from replication. The MENA CSP initiative also aims at generating much-
needed employment through technology transfer and local manufacturing. Morocco has decided at the highest level to play
a leadership role in the development of CSP thereby initiating a clean energy transformation that shows the world what
real financial commitment to solar power can create. It is ideally positioned given its high solar resource base, reasonable
investment climate, and proximity to European markets. However, the Ouarzazate project's success depends on solar
energy exports to Europe. The World Bank is supporting Morocco in its dialogue with European countries to establish a
framework for exports and will provide financial support for the next phases of Ouarzazate (2 nd IBRD project in FY14).

25. 
IBRD lending instruments - range of instruments being used. The use of DPLs has become a
defining aspect of the Bank's program as the Government has sought to effectively use this instrument to
advance the significant reform agenda in response to unfolding demands. In parallel, the Bank continues
to 
implement sectoral 
investments encompassing water and sanitation, rural 
roads, 
irrigation

8

modernization, and agriculture projects, and delivered $200 million in IBRD funds and $97 million in
CTF in support of the Ouarzazate Solar Power project (Box 2). The Bank, through grant funding from the
Global Program for Output Based Aid (GPOBA), has also promoted the piloting of innovative output-
based aid approaches to extend water services to the poor in peri-urban and rural areas (Box 3). A new
and innovative feature of the Bank's program is the proposed use of the Program-For-Results (P-for-R)
instrument as the Bank's FY12 support to the INDH 2 program. The P-for-R allows the Bank to respond
to the Government's request for greater use of country systems and also supports important aspects of the
Bank's program as regards strengthening institutions and developing capacity at all levels, focusing on
results, and improving coordination among partners.

Box 3: Ouput-Based Aid Pilot to extend Water and Sanitation Service in low-income peri-urban areas.

Between 2007 and 2011, the Government and water utility operators in Casablanca, Mekn s and Tangiers implemented a
grant from the Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) to pilot an innovative output-based aid (OBA)
approach, the first in the MENA region, to encourage service expansion to low-income peri-urban settlements, where
connection fees (priced at marginal cost) were unaffordable. The project paid subsidies to the operators for delivering
concrete outputs of network connections to water supply and sewerage services for households. The subsidy was paid only
after the outputs were realized and independently verified. The pilot resulted in subsidized access to more than 52,500
people. All parties agree that the OBA approach has proven an efficient tool to extend services in a cost-efficient and
sustainable manner. It particularly contributed to improve women and children's living conditions as they were/are the
major water provider/manager in the family. A documentary movie was made to capture this good practice example,
which the Government is now considering scaling-up nationwide.

26. 
Portfolio management. Morocco's investment lending portfolio is growing. Only 3 projects
under implementation today were part of the portfolio at the time the CPS was discussed. In June 2010,
the Bank approved $285 million for 3 new projects in the water, irrigation and sanitation sectors, and in
November 2011, approved the Ouarzazate Solar Energy project for $200 million. The IBRD investment
portfolio now consists of 7 operations for a total of $839.5 million with an undisbursed balance of $617.6
million (the high undisbursed balance reflects the relative newness of the operations). Performance of the
portfolio has been broadly satisfactory with all projects rated Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory.
There have been notable delays in getting new projects up-and-running due to the lengthy procurement
processes and the concentration on capacity building at the start of projects' implementation, particularly
for decentralized entities that are responsible for project implementation. Hence, Morocco suffers from a
relatively weak disbursement ratio of its investment projects of 21.7% in FY10 and 14.l1% 
in FY11.

27. 
AAA. The importance of the knowledge role of the Bank to inform reforms and the
accompaniment of reform implementation through TA, capacity building and policy dialogue is a key
aspect of the partnership with the country. The approach of the Bank has been to carry out strong AAA
that underpins dialogue and advocacy in many sectors, and then builds up the Bank's engagement to DPL
or investment financing once the sectoral reform programs are well designed, fully costed and with
relevant objectives and indicators in place. In several cases, the Bank's AAA program has encompassed
cutting-edge work (see Annex 4) and provided an excellent vehicle for advocacy of critical issues -
addressing youth exclusion, social protection reform, poverty analysis, governance issues, scaling up
innovative service delivery approaches such as Conditional Cash Transfers (CCT), competitiveness, labor
market issues - so the Bank is well placed to partner with the Government in these areas.

28. 
IFC has scaled up its engagement in Morocco during the CPS period. Since FY10, IFC has
committed around $203 million in seven projects (including mobilization and south-south investments) in
the financial markets, infrastructure, and mining sectors. IFC has also had a strong and complementary
advisory services program for investment climate, microfinance and PPPs in infrastructure. 
IFC
supported two flagship PPP projects showcasing Morocco's regional leadership on climate change and
water: (i) a PPP advisory project to help assess the feasibility of, and structure the Ouarzazate
concentrated solar power project; and (ii) support to the Ministry of Agriculture to structure and

9

implement Morocco's first PPP for desalination and integrated irrigation in the Chtouka region, one of
Morocco's largest agricultural areas. IFC also provided capacity building to the Ministry of Finance to
help with the design and implementation of PPP projects in health and education. IFC's investment
program has grown from a committed portfolio of only around $6 million in two companies in FY06 to
almost $220 million in nine companies at end-April 2012. This has also allowed IFC to have significant
development impact including supporting the creation of around 12,000 jobs and helping generate $1.3
billion of volume in MSME loans.

29. 
Given recent events in the region and a changing domestic environment, IFC's immediate
response has been to restore investor's confidence by increasing its engagement in Morocco. Since
January 2011, IFC has invested close to $162 million (of which $50 million in mobilization and south-
south) in three projects in priority areas such as microfinance, trade finance, and insurance. The Board
also recently approved a US$209 million equity investment (including mobilization) in a Moroccan
banking group to support the bank's transformation into a regional SME champion. IFC's investment
will: (a) help attract other investors into Morocco's banking sector; (b) increase access to finance for
SMEs and (c) encourage regional integration and expansion 
into Sub-Saharan Africa. 
IFC has
increasingly focused on improving good corporate governance standards and debt resolution mechanisms
for SMEs.

30. 
As part of the flexible CPS, IFC's program adapted to market conditions in a difficult
investment environment for the private sector. IFC's investment pipeline, namely in infrastructure and
the real sector, was affected by the global crisis, and some projects were delayed or resorted to public
financing. IFC has also not been able to invest directly in the agribusiness sector due to lack of suitable
opportunities. However, we have invested in private equity funds which target high growth SMEs in the
agribusiness sector. The lack of an appropriate regulatory framework for private education and health
services has also hampered IFC from investing in these sectors.

31. 
Donor Harmonization, Partnerships and Trust Funds. Alignment of donor programs with
Government priorities continues to be strong, especially around budget support operations. Donors have
continued their good partnerships around programs such as Education, Public Administration Reform,
Financial Sector, National Initiative for Human Development and rural roads . Morocco participated in
the 2011 Survey on Monitoring the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness which concluded that $2bn of
aid was received in 2010 (not including IFC or European Investment Bank financing), accounting for
about 2% of GDP and 7% of the Government's budget. For the World Bank, 98.5% of financing was
delivered directly to the Government's budget (either through direct budget support or through projects
financed through the budget) and 80% used country systems (this was the DPL proportion with the other
20% using country financial systems but World Bank procurement systems). As shown in Annex 5, the
Bank continues to mobilize significant trust funds for Morocco to complement its engagement. A
particular success of the CPS period to date has been the budgeting of these trust funds in the 2012
country budget to contribute to their smooth implementation going forward.

32. 
Consultations. The dissemination of knowledge, outreach to beneficiaries, and consultations
with stakeholders evolved into central themes of the CPS over the course of its implementation8 .
This is in line with Bank efforts to adapt to the profound changes in the political economy of the MENA
region with a more inclusive approach to development. Within Morocco it has been a process of
expanding on current practices to increase transparency and broaden the range of relationships, to ensure
that beneficiaries are fully informed about Bank programs, have an opportunity to provide input on their
design, as well as give feedback on the results of their implementation. As concrete recent examples, the

The new arrival of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) in Morocco is also a promising new partnership for the
World Bank given good experience between the two banks in the ECA region and also because the EBRD is drawing from the World Bank's
knowledge of the MENA region for their own engagement.
A full list of the Bank's consultations, out-reach and partnerships with CSOs and other audiences is detailed in Annex 6.

10

Bank engaged in broad consultations on the Judicial Enhancement project as regards citizens' views on
how best to improve service in Moroccan tribunals, as well as technical/legal views from people working
within the judicial system on the priority reform areas. This allowed for a more informed vision on the
justice sector and for sharing of concrete experiences on the difficulties citizens experience with service
delivery. These consultations have not only helped to refine the operational framework of the project but
also to identify the need to adopt a participatory approach in the project's implementation. Similarly, the
Bank engaged in five different multi-stakeholders consultations on the INDH project with the objective of
better grounding the INDH second phase on the needs of beneficiaries, on the role of non government
actors, and on the critical issues of project design for local participation and ownership. Views and
recommendations greatly helped inform the design of the operation and its expected results. The
communications and out-reach strategy of the Bank in Morocco aims to continue these local, regional and
global initiatives to make the Bank more accessible, to take advantage of new communication
technologies to create more channels for dialogue, to continue building ties with civil society through the
development of a more systemic approach to public consultations, and to promote social accountability.

33. 
Regional Integration, Arab World Initiative (AWI), Deauville Process and Alignment with
MENA Region Framework. Morocco's CPS detailed the regional activities underway that aimed to
capitalize on the opportunities of better regional and cross-border cooperation and that fell under the
overall umbrella of the AWL. Morocco's participation in several regional AAA and capacity building
activities has continued -
through the MENA Concentrated Solar Power initiative (IBRD's financing of
the Ouarzazate solar energy project), trade and investment AAA, climate change impacts, water resource
management, and Morocco's founding membership in the Marseille Center for Mediterranean Integration.
Two highlights of the Bank's AWI work are the MSME Project (FY12) and the 2012 study on regional
cross border trade facilitation and infrastructure for the Maghreb countries (Algeria, Libya, Mauritania,
Morocco, Tunisia)9 . Morocco hosted the ANSA regional workshop in March 2012 and the second
regional forum on the Arab Financing Facility for Infrastructure (AFFI) in April 2012. Morocco has
participated in the Deauville Process and the Bank Group has confirmed that its program is fully aligned
with that framework for engagement built around creating jobs, accelerating growth, strengthening
governance and ensuring economic and social inclusion. This is also the framework for engagement of
the MENA region thus ensuring CPS alignment with MENA regional priorities.

34. 
IFC's work supported regional integration and south-south investments by regional players
from Morocco into Sub-Saharan Africa. IFC supported a Moroccan insurance group (FY12, $125
million) to expand into underserved insurance markets in 12 Sub-Saharan Africa countries and also
provided $22 million in equity to a regional fund to support high growth SMEs in the Maghreb. From
FY1O-12 (year to date), IFC provided $55 million to a leading Moroccan bank to increase access to
finance to SMEs in Sub Saharan Africa. IFC also invested in a Senegalese subsidiary of Morocco's power
utility to supply power to rural areas in Senegal, and committed a $12 million investment in a regional
private equity fund targeting infrastructure investments in North and Sub-Saharan Africa.

3.3 Lessons Learned Relevant to the Strategy Going Forward

35. 
Morocco's response to the challenges emerging from the Arab Spring provides lessons in
political economy for the strategy going forward. As noted, Morocco faced challenges similar to other
countries in MENA: high unemployment and poor job quality, inequality, exclusionary practices that
benefited the elites, and a public service delivery system that has partially failed to deliver quality results.
The Moroccan response thus far has been effective because of a new willingness to work in a more
participatory and inclusive mannerlo. There is broad understanding in Morocco that to achieve real social

9 The action plan and recommendations of this study are expected to be approved at a ministerial workshop to be held in May 2012 in Morocco,
and to lead to the preparation of a regional trade and integration project for Maghreb countries to be implemented with the support of the Bank
and other development partners. Note: the closed border between Morocco and Algeria represents a significant obstacle to greater integration.
1o The new Constitution specifically states that the Government is obliged to work in a more participatory and inclusive way.

11

transformation requires two comprehensive sets of reforms - one set that covers equitable growth and
jobs, and the other around service delivery and governance. This new context and drawing from lessons
of the past are incorporated in the implementation of the program for the rest of the CPS period.
36. 
The CPS emphasis on sector reforms has proven effective in addressing weaknesses in
cross-Ministerial coordination. The CPS implementation to date confirms a lesson learned from the
CAS Completion Report (for the 2005-2009 period) that highlighted the importance of understanding the
dynamics of the reform environment in Morocco and concluded that there had been a notable difference
in the impact and effectiveness of reform programs that were targeted to specific sectors, compared to
reform programs that were multi-sectoral and demanded complex cross-ministerial coordination that
proved challenging. Now, several sector-specific DPL programs are being pursued (e.g. Plan Maroc Vert,
Solid Waste, Urban Transport, and Education) where the likelihood of impact is deemed greater through a
sectoral approach, enabling the pursuit of many reforms.

37. 
Effective delivery, however, requires attention to transversal issues such as employment
generation, governance issues in service delivery, social accountability and inclusion. Several critical
national priorities call for efforts across the board to realize them. Recently, the response of the Bank
program has been to design operations that support the Government on mobilizing multiple institutions
and actors and ensuring better coordination and communication of reforms that impact several sectors at
once. Two such operations are the Competitiveness DPL (FY13) and the Skills & Employment DPL
(FY12). The Governance and Accountability DPL (FY13) will be complementary to the mandate of the
Head of Government in Morocco that shifts the focus away from public sector reform and towards better
impact of service delivery, while ensuring greater coordination in Government for implementing main
priorities of the national agenda. The new Constitution mandates a greater emphasis on a more systemic
approach to public consultations and citizen participation, including the active participation in decision-
making by CSOs and young citizens through new institutions such as the Socio-Economic Council and
the Consultative Council for Youth and Civic Engagement. This mandate will be supported by the Bank
through instruments for greater out-reach, inclusion and accountability.

Box 4: Solid Waste Sector - Good Example of Building Up Bank Engagement

The Solid Waste Management (SWM) sector has a long history of Bank-client dialogue on sector policies and strong
analytical foundations that allowed the Bank to accompany the Government in a well-designed and phased program.
The Bank carried out an ESW on "The costs of environmental degradation in MENA" which helped in understanding the
negative impact of the SWM in terms of environmental, social and economic aspects, estimating that the cost of sub-
standard SWM practices in Morocco was 0.5% of GDP. This, in turn, helped rank the sector as a top priority by the
Government which put through legislation on the sector that was informed by several pieces of Bank AAA, and then
designed the national solid waste program (PNDM in French) that outlined the sectoral reform program over the
medium-term. The Bank accompanied the Government on the implementation of the 1st phase of the PNDM through a
programmatic series of 2 DPLs. The Government took advantage of the analysis, planning framework, implementation
support and convening power offered by a sectoral DPL whilst maintaining full leadership and ownership of the reforms.
The continued relevance of the Bank support is testified by the Government's request to accompany the second phase of
the PNDM with a second series of two programmatic DPLs. In sum, the experience of the approach in this sector has
been positive and confirms the usefulness of the DPL instrument under the right set of circumstances.

38. 
Importance of Knowledge and TA to Accompany Reforms. The strong AAA approach taken
to date provides a lesson on how to develop a solid country engagement (Box 4), and will be continued
for the future more ambitious reforms to be undertaken, through ensuring that the Bank has the required
knowledge and expertise to accompany the Government and can add real value to the process. In parallel,
the implementation of the program to date has highlighted the need to step up TA and implementation
support for reforms, with regular demand from interlocutors in this regard. This will be even more
important for multi-sectoral reform programs, especially DPLs where TA can help develop policy options
and implement the policies once adopted to improve the chances of sustainability. Going forward, the
Bank's program needs to step up implementation support, including exploring the possibility of a TA
lending operation that could cluster efforts and more systematically address implementation challenges.

12

IV. THE CPS PROGRAM GOING FORWARD

39. 
The Bank Group's discussions with the new Government counterparts have confirmed the
relevance of the flexible CPS, which allows for responsiveness to client demand, adjusts and facilitates
scaling up of the program in relevant areas. The program going forward allows for continuity while
proposing some shifts in emphasis to align further with the priorities of the new Government's Plan for
2012-2016 and to adhere to the MENA region strategy of "doing things differently" in the post-Arab
Spring context. The program is being adapted to respond better on strengthening governance and
accountability, ensuring greater social and economic inclusion, and increasing voice and participation. As
already noted earlier, the CPS results matrix (Annex 1) is confirmed as being largely relevant for the rest
of the CPS period, although some revisions have been made 
to add a new area of focus
(Competitiveness), introduce gender-specific indicators in Education, Vulnerability and Social Inclusion,
align better expected results with the Bank's program in key areas (Social Protection, Skills and
Employment), and ensure flexibility needed to capture results that will be achieved in the next CPS period
(each revision is explained in the results matrix).

40. 

This CPS Progress Report proposes two fundamental directions for the Bank's program;

* Supporting more ambitious reforms through targeting effective delivery and tighter coordination
around concrete results. This involves two main tracks: (i) continued support to the program areas
undertaken to date which remain relevant with an enhanced focus on sectoral governance issues,
communication and participation; and (ii) stepped-up Bank engagement in support of more ambitious
priority reforms that are addressing cross-sectoral issues. These areas are economic competitiveness
in support of growth and job creation (CPS Pillar 1), governance (the cross-cutting beam of the CPS),
social protection and subsidy reform (CPS Pillar 2), and strengthening 
inclusion and voice,
particularly of youth and women (covered under CPS Pillar 2)11.
* Introducing multi-sector approaches to lay the basis for consolidation in the next CPS. The
Bank's engagement for the rest of this CPS period will build the foundations for further consolidation
of the program in the next CPS, bringing synergies where possible and pursuing more multi-sectoral
approaches. This will allow for stronger alignment with the Government's priorities of addressing
complex cross-sectoral issues, while setting the framework for future consolidation of the Bank's
program in Morocco.

4.1 Supporting More Ambitious Reforms

Growth, Competitiveness & Employment

41. 
The Bank Group's program has already stepped-up its engagement here as there was broad
consensus that the positive growth experience of the last decade was not sufficient for Morocco to
meet its development challenges, especially as regards job creation. The on-going program in support
of greater competitiveness is being strengthened, building on the good progress that has been made thus
far. The Competitiveness DPL (FY13), Financial Sector DPL-2 (FY13) and the MSME investment
project (FY12) will provide a package of support to target better economic governance and improvements
to the investment climate and the financial sector that support greater private sector development,
innovation, trade and the related job creation that is expected to come about. Support is being provided to
implement 
the new Competition Law and strengthen the Competition Council 
in line with the
Constitutional mandate. The work will continue to create a fair playing field and facilitate the entry of
new firms. Besides work on regulation, support from the Bank and IFC will continue for individuals and
MSMEs to gain access to finance which also supports the goal of job creation. The international trade

These areas of focus are all aligned with the MENA Regional Update presented to the Board in February 2012.

13

agenda is being prioritized supporting Morocco to take advantage of recent openings to boost trade and
integration with its regional neighbors, the EU and USA, as well as deepen its global integration with
other regions. The competitiveness agenda through the Second DPL for the Plan Maroc Vert (FY13)
maintains support for the development of the private sector in agriculture and targets improvements in the
efficiency of domestic markets by reducing marketing costs and improving marketing services.

42. 
The Bank Group will step up its support for Government's efforts to deliver better
employment opportunities. The focus will be multiple. First, at the policy level, the Skills and
Employment DPL (FY12) and the Employment TA target labor market programs and vocational training
to create a more conducive environment for the creation of good jobs. Their agenda aims to broaden the
focus of labor market programs, currently targeted largely to university graduates, who constitute only
20% of unemployed, and to include less educated youth and more young women in its coverage. In
addition, the work will introduce rigorous evaluation systems to improve the mixed performance of
existing labor market programs. At the project-specific level, the INDH-2 project (FY12) has a core
focus on revenue generating activities that target job creation, especially in poor areas and for young
people and women, thus supporting short-term responses to creating jobs. Together with the Islamic
Development Bank, IFC is leading the regional Education for Employment Initiative in the Arab World
(e4e) to engage the private sector to create new opportunities for employment-based education and
enhance labor market skills for Arab youth and women seeking productive employment. Design and
fundraising for country-specific e4e roadmaps is ongoing. The Ouarzazate project (FY12) has a specific
goal of supporting the creation of the solar industry locally in Morocco that could lead to the creation of
green jobs. The Bank will also launch further AAA in areas exploring the linkages between urban
productivity, informal sectors, economic opportunity and job creation.

43. 
Going forward, IFC's strategy in Morocco will continue to focus on increasing private
sector led inclusive growth and job creation by: (i) providing counter-cyclical support to existing
clients and new firms, especially with a view to increasing employment through increased access to
finance for MSMEs; (ii) facilitating the expansion of regional champions in underserved markets; (iii)
supporting innovative and high value added industries; (iv) improving infrastructure and social services;
and (v) strengthening corporate governance and the investment climate. The IFC will also increasingly
focus on inclusion (youth and women) and underserved areas. IFC's investment pipeline for FY12-13
includes four to five projects in trade finance, SME regional funds, SME banking, social housing and
renewable energy. IFC's newly created MENA Fund will be critical in mobilizing additional investments
to support financial intermediaries. It will also leverage the regional SME Facility to increase access to
finance for SMEs and complement the MSME technical assistance facilityl2 . PPP work will be integrated
into the broader Arab Financing Facility for Infrastructure (AFFI) initiative1 3 and will focus on financing
and advisory assistance to innovative infrastructure projects.

Governance

44. 
The Bank will realign 
its governance agenda 
to support the development and
implementation of the new constitution and the revision of the country's overall governance
structure that follows. These changes now provide the Government with a new framework to address
past shortcomings and push forward on a broad range of governance reforms that will strengthen
transparency, accountability, citizen voice and participation in public affairs. Governance will remain
mainstreamed in the CPS as a cross-cutting beam, and in the Bank's operations (all DPLs pursue specific

12 MENA SME Facility and MSME Technical Assistance Facility: a comprehensive regional initiative in collaboration with the JBRD, EIB and
KfW, to enhance SME access to finance and support job creation and broad-based economic growth. Advisory work has begun and financing of
investment facility underway.
13 AFFI and a complementary Technical Assistance Facility (TAF) are a joint initiative between the World Bank, IsDB and JFC to foster
infrastructure investments in Arab countries.

14

governance reforms in their respective sectors). For FY13, the Bank has two mutually-reinforcing DPLs
which pursue economic governance and business environment reforms. The Competitiveness DPL
focuses on key regulatory and institutional changes to facilitate private sector development, including the
strengthening of the powers of the Competition Council. The Financial Sector DPL will continue to
strengthen governance of the banking sector and, together with the MSME Project, will support greater
MSME access to finance. To support the access to and the efficiency of the judiciary, which is a key
priority of the government, the Bank is preparing a Judicial Sector Performance Enhancement project
which is being delivered in FY12. For FY13 the Bank is preparing a Governance & Accountability DPL
that is linked to the main governance pillars of the reform program of the Government. A range of
different governance reforms are currently being considered in this context:

* 

* 

S1 

* S.'1 Ligthi 

Improving transparency and public dialogue: (i) Supporting the implementation of the new
constitutional right of access to information which will require the development of dedicated
legislation that will specify key principles; (ii) Assisting government to increase the transparency of
the budget to stimulate policy discussions about the priorities and underlying strategies of
government spending; (iii) supporting efforts to improve government internal coordination and
public debate about complex reforms. In particular, the Bank is providing advice on setting up a
comprehensive consultation process for new legislation, and is contributing to the national dialogue
on justice which aims at building consensus for a comprehensive justice reform program.

iigL iii/ g government accountability and the delivery of public services: (i) Supporting the
development and the implementation of new legal framework to improve expenditure management,
in particular the introduction of program budget that would link public expenditures to clearly
defined objectives and outcomes; (ii) Assisting 
in the development of a government-wide
performance monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) Strengthening institutions of accountability, in
particular 
the anti-corruption agency which has gained additional powers through the new
constitution; (iv) Supporting the government's efforts to simplify and certify administrative
procedures relevant for citizens, such as birth and residency certificates, driver's license or criminal
records, to reduce existing delays and potential discretion in the delivery of these services; (v)
Broadening the use of ICTs to improve access to and delivery of public services to citizens and
businesses, also in remote areas of the country; and (vi) Supporting the development of a new
administrative and fiscal framework for local government development which aims at strengthening
the powers and responsibilities of sub-national governments
11 
/h 
i 
sectoral governance will continue to be stressed in order to assure that the program
bears results and is sustainable. The support will be provided through IBRD operations and those
activities financed by the Bank budget or trust funds. For example, the energy sector engagement of
the Bank has a strong emphasis on providing TA for the improvement of the regulatory environment
(results expected are detailed in results matrix), and similar attention to sector governance is being
provided in other sectors where the program is engaged.

14

Strengthening Gender, Inclusion and Voice

45. 
The focus on gender, inclusion and voice will be heightened during the remainder of the
CPS. The Bank will bring to bear its growing knowledge base on gender and youth issues 
in
strengthening its partnership with the Government on data sharing that also contributes to understanding
better the development constraints that these groups face. The Bank's program is stepping up its support
to Morocco to strengthen citizen participation and voice and ensure greater inclusion of vulnerable
groups. The envisaged approach for the rest of the CPS period in this area is two-fold: (i) Using
knowledge as a platform for dialogue and advocacy, through disseminating data from the AAA program

14 These reforms contribute to the Government's open governance agenda and to Morocco's eligibility to the Open Government Partnership

15

to inform reforms, nourish public debate and ensure more effective targeting of these groups; and (ii) the
implementation of the on-going portfolio continues to work with stakeholder and citizen groups with an
emphasis on gender main-streaming where possible, and enhancing outreach and communication.

Box 5: Strengthening the Gender Focus of the Program

The flag-ship operation on targeting women, tackling vulnerahilirr and inclusion is the National Initiative for Human
Development 2 (INDH2 - FY12). This project aims to address economic and social inclusion through a participatory
and community-driven approach that promotes voice 
in development, using participatory mechanisms and social
accountability measures, reaching out to marginalized groups (women and youth), and tackling poverty and vulnerability.
It is one of the main instruments to support the second pillar of the CPS: "Increasing Access to and Quality of Service
Delivery for All" and contributes directly to the results area: "Reducing vulnerability and social exclusion" (new
indicators have been added to the results matrix for the INDH2 implementation period until the end of the CPS). It
focuses on: (i) improved access to basic infrastructure, social services and economic opportunities for poor and
vulnerable groups, including women and youth; 
(ii) provision of sustainable and improved quality of services to
vulnerable groups; (iii) better coordination of national policies and institutional mechanisms to reduce vulnerability; and
(iv) consolidation of participatory approaches to ensure that basic infrastructure and socio-economic services meet the
basic needs of excluded and vulnerable groups, particularly women and youth. The M&E component is being designed
to provide gender-disaggregated information on all measured inputs, outputs and outcomes and there will be a strong
focus on generalization of social accountability tools (grievance redress mechanisms, participatory M&E, community
scorecards, beneficiary studies).
Using Knowledge as a Platform for Advocacy. The Concrete Examples. The Bank's report "Promoting Youth
Bank's AAA program both in Morocco and at the MENA Opportunities and Participation" looks in greater detail at
different aspects of development challenges faced by youth
level 
is informing 
the dialogue on gender issues and 
youth. As Annex 4 details, 
the Bank has carried out 
groups. Along with the TA program in employment, the
several 
innovative and far-reaching pieces of AAA 
in 
social protection strategy note, and statistical work on
Morocco that are informing dialogue and operations. 
It 
poverty, this knowledge is informing the Bank's dialogue
will take this knowledge base further and complement it 
on gender and inclusion. The Bank plans to conduct a
by new analytics planned for FY13 and beyond. As gender Country Gender Assessment (FY13) that will lead to a
knowledge becomes more programmatic, it is expected Gender Action Plan which 
itself can contribute 
to
that it will be further mainstreamed into policy dialogue 
informing future operations. The MENA report "Opening
and project design. 
Doors: Gender equality in MENA", an accompaniment to
the WDR Gender report, provides 
a 
further 
strong
analytical basis on which consultations and gender policy
priorities can be predicated.
On-going and planned Bank Group proects 
are Concrete Examples. The MSME Project (FY12) endeavors
d 
strengthening the focus on women'sg inclusion and 
to have a gender focus, through 
targeting financing 
to
citizen participation into Bank-financed operationss. The micro, small and medium-sized enterprises which have a
Bank's engagement is a continual process of re-orienting 
high share of women-owned business. The Education
the program to focus further on gender issues. The results DPL2 (FY13) is focusing on strengthening the delivery of
of this enhanced gender-focused engagement of the 
education services 
to all, including with a gender dis-
program will be more effectively captured and will be 
aggregated focus, and the results matrix for this area has
continued and scaled-up in the next CPS. 
been updated 
to 
introduce gender 
indicators 
to 
track
and__project_design. 
_Doors:_Gender_equalityin 
progress in this regard.
ICs! key strategic focus of itst investment and advisory services is to empower women entrepreneurs especially in
underserved regions. IFC has partnered with MFIs (FONDEP and Al Amana) which have a strong gender focus, through
providing a total of $30 million in financing and capacity building in credit, risk and human resources management and
business strategy. IFC efforts have contributed to increase these MFIs' outreach and resilience, and position them for
growth and transformation. These interventions have been instrumental in increasing access to finance to women micro
entrepreneurs. Al Amana, and FONDEP collectively provide annually close to $500 million in over 400,000 micro loans
of which more than 
i 0 o are women borrowers - this is the largest gender outreach in MENA and has a significant impact
on female empowerment. FONDEP and Al Amana also operate in rural and remote areas of Morocco, thus helping
reduce income disparities and create jobs in underserved regions.

Social Protection & Subsidy Reform

46. 

The Bank's program is already responding to the request for assistance for development of
a clear vision for the reform of the social protection and subsidy system. As noted previously, the

16

social protection programs currently in place in Morocco are generally not targeted or poorly targeted and
thus their beneficiaries include many who are not most at risk. Moreover, the universal subsidy system
on energy and some food items is becoming financially unsustainable. The Government's medium-term
program has put a priority on bringing down the cost of the subsidy system and carrying out a
comprehensive overhaul of the social protection model to ensure better targeting, although details on this
program have not yet been articulated. The World Bank has a long standing experience in supporting
countries with these reforms in line with the specific institutional characteristics and political economy
constraints each country is facing. International experience shows that reform of food and fuel subsidies
can be politically explosive and must be done carefully and gradually to avoid political and social unrest.
The political economy issues surrounding subsidy reform in Morocco are sufficiently complex that there
is a need to remain realistic about what could be achieved: it would not be prudent to assume that many
reforms could be completed in the remainder of the CPS period. The Moroccan Government is fully
cognizant of the competing needs to move urgently on subsidy reform but, at the same time, to sequence
the reforms adequately to protect the poorest. The Bank's support is through providing analytical support
to inform the medium-term reform program, through advice on the phasing of reform implementation and
the need for public outreach campaigns to ensure successful acceptance by the population, and through
support to measures that ensure the introduction of an adequate safety net program that provides
protection for those most at risk.

47. 
In the case of Morocco, tools and programs for more accurate targeting and improving
impact and efficiency are available and the Bank has a strong experience and knowledge base that
will nourish the reforms. The AAA program has assessed multiple dimensions of the social protection
system through different lenses - the Social Protection ESW and TA, the impact evaluation of the Tayssir
CCT, pension TA and poverty ESW. The INDH2 project is a critical pillar of the social protection system
that the Bank is supporting through a planned $300 million project investment. The design of the second
phase of the INDH has drawn extensively on the implementation experience to date, on new available
data to allow for better targeting, and on Bank-wide global best practice. The Bank's assistance is thus
pursuing different tracks in parallel, while supporting the dialogue on policy reforms that responds to the
timing and complexity of the overall context, with a greater focus expected in the next CPS in line with
the expected timing of Government reforms.

4.2 Preparing for Greater Consolidation of the Program

48. 
For the remainder of the CPS period, the Bank will work towards preparing the ground for
greater consolidation, prioritization and sequencing of the program for the next CPS. The Bank's
program has evolved during CPS implementation to encompass a greater focus on multi-sectoral
operations (such as Skills and Employment DPL, Competitiveness DPL), and this focus on cross-cutting
issues and greater consolidation of the program will be firmed up in the next CPS. For example, the
Governance and Accountability DPL is shifting focus away from a more traditional administrative reform
agenda, towards the improvement of transparency, accountability and quality of service delivery. The
Climate Change/Green Growth DPL will target a package of interventions encompassing multi-sectoral
aspects in energy, mining, transport, water and environment. The proposed enhanced TA support on
improving implementation and coordination will underpin the multi-sectoral interventions. In the same
way, the lessons learned from pilot approaches and the knowledge gained from the Country Gender
Assessment will allow for better prioritization and mainstreaming of interventions targeting gender and
inclusion. The experience of the P-for-R instrument will inform the design of the next CPS, through
ascertaining if this instrument adds value, responds to client demand and thus merits further rolling out in
other areas. Going forward, Trust Funds will be aligned with the main areas of Bank intervention (either
DPLs or other projects), and other Bank Group instruments (guarantees, support to PPPs) will be
considered as part of a package of support in specific areas (such as energy).

17

4.3 Lending Pipeline

49. 
The enhanced areas of focus of the Bank's program for the rest of the CPS period are
agreed although financing volumes for FY13 will depend on the overall progress on program
implementation and availability of IBRD. The FY12 lending (Table 3) is agreed with the Government,
with a focus on investment lending/P-for-R. The CPS maintains its flexible approach going forward and
the FY13 lending pipeline (Table 4) proposes several operations, some of which are at advanced stages of
preparation. FY13 lending is expected to be above the annual $600 million amount and will depend on
program performance and, in the case of DPLs, on the ambition of the reforms being supported. IBRD's
capital constraints will also be a factor in FY13 lending volumes. Given the focus on investment lending
in FY12, the Government has requested a greater proportion of DPLs in FY13 to respond to financing
needs and to ensure support for accelerated policy reform (Annex 3 has full details on the program).

Table 3: FY12 Lending Program 
Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power Plant 
Skills and Employment DPL 1 
Judicial Performance Enhancement Project 
National Initiative for Human Development 2 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Dev't 
Total 

$ million
200
100
16
300
100
716

Table 4: FY13 Pipeline of Potential Lending
Competitiveness DPL 1
Governance and Accountability DPL 1
Financial Sector DPL 2
Plan Maroc Vert DPL 2
Urban Transport DPL 2
Solid Waste DPL 3
Education DPL 2
Climate Change DPL 1
Road Asset Management

V. RISKS

5.1 Political and Governance Risks

50. 
Despite Morocco's political distinctiveness in the region, there is real pressure on the
Moroccan state for meaningful and quick change, with high expectations that reforms will be
implemented in a credible manner. Morocco is better positioned than other countries in the region to face
these political risks successfully. A combination of factors makes it unique among the countries of the
Arab spring -
the Monarchy is supported by the majority of the population, it continues to manage
effectively its close ties with Europe, Gulf countries and the international community, and the new
Government has, at least in the short-run, the support of the population to push through on some critical
reforms that will signal its commitment. Nevertheless, important cracks remain in the socio-political
environment - bulging youth population, unemployment, weak governance and one of the largest gaps
between rich and poor in the Arab world. This is a challenge for any Government, but more so for one
that has a political party at its head for the first time, and that is a coalition of parties which could hamper
the implementation of reform programs. The political risks for the PJD as regards delivering on
expectations are significant as it must ensure that the governing coalition is a strong one, not divided by
different priorities. The Government may fail to address these problems, which could set off renewed
protests that might not be so peaceful or favorable. If the Government fails to address these problems,
there is a risk that this could set off renewed protests that might not be so peaceful or favorable.

18

51. 
To mitigate this risk, the new Government's governance reform agenda is ambitious as
regards the commitment. The new Constitution and the strengthening of the country's overall
governance structure now provide the Government with an opportunity to address past shortcomings and
consolidate the principles of modem governance. The new Constitution also obliges a participatory
process in Government. The envisaged agenda has broad support and the Government has reiterated its
willingness to continue to work for the quick implementation of key measures that should not be delayed
in light of political constraints. However, while there is a strong degree of continuity - confirming that
several sector plans remain valid - the new Government's program has not yet been fully articulated
which raises some concerns about lack of concreteness. The Government is working towards articulating
more clearly reform priorities, recognizing that this will demand more in-depth and substantive reforms
rather than some of the more technical ones pursued to date, which will require political courage and
building consensus amongst stakeholders. The Bank will help mitigate this risk though its dialogue and
TA support to the further articulation of sectoral programs and reform priorities, and through more
intensive efforts to ensure an effective accompaniment to reform implementation. It is advising on the
sequencing of reform implementation and on critical communication aspects which aim for developing
better shared ownership amongst players. Morocco also benefits from an active and vocal civil society
with many mature and competent CSOs in action who can play a key role.

52. 
Further mitigation efforts will include continued focus on supporting all actors' efforts in
these areas, recognizing the increased need for coherence and coordination and the importance of
fostering public understanding and ownership of reforms. The emphasis will be on ensuring
dissemination and follow-through on recommendations, piloting new accountability tools, and supporting
key governance institutions. As many of these reforms are new, the Bank will provide technical
assistance based on international standards and experience. The Bank team will continue to monitor the
political evolution closely and will continuously assess the potential for political developments to
influence the implementation of the Bank's program. The Bank will stand ready to adapt the program,
and particularly specific reform operations supported by DPLs, to measures and reform areas that become
relevant (including down-scaling the program as necessary).

5.2 Macro-Economic Risk

53. 
The macro-economic risks facing Morocco include: the possible deterioration of the on-
going global economic difficulties; the further impact of poor weather on the agricultural sector,
and the high prices of food and energy. Should the current global economic uncertainty further
deteriorate, especially if European stagnation evolves into a recession, Morocco would face reduced
growth prospects. Continued low rainfall could potentially further effect agricultural growth forecasts
and overall growth rates. Furthermore, should oil prices remain at current levels for the year, Morocco
would likely see its growth prospects reduced by about 0.5%. The management and mitigation of macro-
economic risk are predicated on the new Government's strong commitment to fiscal and competitiveness
reforms. The mitigating measures on agriculture include support to farmers and possibly suspension of
import duties on cereals. The Government is devising strategies to cope with potentially sustained high
oil prices, including requesting Bank support to develop mechanisms to hedge commodity price risk. The
Bank's continued engagement in the CPS areas and other donors' stepped up engagement will support the
Government in its efforts to ensure the overall medium term macroeconomic sustainability.

54. 
However, the most significant macroeconomic risk is that of deterioration of the fiscal
balance which has been exacerbated by the increasing costs of the subsidy system. As noted earlier in
this report, the Government's plan is to decrease the budget deficit in 2012 to 5.1% of GDP, through
incorporating specific measures to contain public spending, further advancing the fiscal reform agenda,
increasing revenues through better tax mobilization, pushing through on competitiveness reforms, and
starting reform of the subsidy system. If consensus cannot be reached to take significant measures this

19

calendar year, there is a risk that the budget deficit could be even higher. Carrying out the proposed
multiple interventions urgently should help mitigate the fiscal risk. Moreover, such a multi-pronged
approach recognizes that several measures are needed in parallel as it is likely that expenditures on
subsidies will remain high in the short-term due to the continued expected high prices of fuel and food, as
well as the complexity of the political economy issues around subsidy reform. These measures are all key
aspects of the Bank's program going forward and continued engagement should help mitigate the risk.

5.3 Financing Risk

55. 

Attainment of the Government's objectives needs to be accompanied by effective financing
mobilization. There is a risk that the Government may face constraints in the next couple of years if
continued instability in financial markets results in higher costs of financing. To mitigate this risk, the
debt optimization strategy of the Government is to seek financing on the domestic market (expected to be
85% of total financing, as outlined in the 2012 Budget Law) as well as from increased support from
donors. Given the overall sound economic fundamentals, the country's low external debt stock, and still
adequate foreign reserves, this strategy is feasible and appropriate. External financiers have, to date,
assessed Morocco as lesser risk than many other countries and donors have indicated their willingness to
step up their support to Morocco (for example, in 2012, the African Development Bank expects to deliver
$1.2 billion in new lending, EIB is aiming for the same lending levels of 2011 - $950 million, the EU will
provide at least $300 million in grants, and AFD is increasing its support to between $400-600 million).
To mitigate further this risk, the Bank and other donors will continue to pursue discussions on public
finances with the Government to assist in further prioritizing their expenditure programs so as to better
align them to the country's financial capacity and existing absorptive capacity. The focus of the Bank's
program on DPL financing in the near term also allows the Bank to mobilize and disburse quickly (and
with predictability) significant levels of financing. Given the current expectations regarding the quality of
the macro-economic environment during the rest of the CPS period, the Bank could support a higher level
of DPL financing if requested: this does not pose a significant risk given the very small size of DPL
financing in the overall country budget.

5.4 Institutional Capacity Risk

56. 
Ensuring adequate institutional capacity to overcome implementation deficiencies, political
interference and a lack of accountability remains a key challenge. While the regulatory and
institutional framework for governance and anti-corruption efforts continues to be strengthened, there are
still significant risks in the capacity to implement such an ambitious reform agenda. The Government is
mitigating this risk by drawing from previous reform implementation experience to improve inter-
ministerial coordination and identify a wide range of measures and actions, including the implementation
of alternative approaches using more PPPs and outsourcing in service delivery. In addition, coordinated
efforts have been deployed by the main donors to mobilize sizeable resources to support capacity building
and technical assistance.

57. 
A significant part of the Bank's program is focused on a series of DPLs that provide
support to sectoral reform programs which are sector-specific and are more easily coordinated and
implemented across the administration. To date, this approach has enhanced performance and
facilitated implementation as it recognizes the capacity limitations of the Moroccan administration and
institutions. While the Bank will continue to pursue this sector-specific approach to mitigate some of the
known institutional capacity risks in Morocco, the program is in parallel also stepping up support for key
reforms that demand multi-sectoral coordination such as economic competitiveness, reform of the social
protection system in general and subsidy system in particular, and governance reforms. This support
encompasses more intensive TA to mitigate implementation difficulties.

20

Annex 1: Morocco CPS Progress Report Results Matrix

Pillar 1: GROWTH, COMPETITIVENESS AND EMPLOYMENT

1.1 BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT

Government Objectives:
* Improve the business environment, especially for SMEs, via a comprehensive investment climate reform strategy supported by an effective reform implementation and coordination
Key Issues Targeted :
1- Uneven quality of the business law/regulatory framework and its enforcement, leading to an unlevel playing field that reduces entry of new SMEs and diversification.
2- Weak and uninstitutionalized process of PSD reform identification, preparation, implementation and coordination.

Progress at CPS-PR: Advanced progress recorded with 4 out of 5 milestones achieved and 2 indicators already achieved or surpassed. Amongst other achievements, Morocco
improved its Doing Business indicators the most in 2011 compared to other global economies, climbing 21 places to 94. The Bank/IFC TA and IDF in support of business
environment reforms has been a significant contributory factor to this improvement and will continue to be a core element of the program going forward. As a consequence, one
indicator is being revised to link with the Doing Business rankings and thus align better with the focus of the Bank/IFC support.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to 
influence 

Streamlined regulatory environment and a 

more equitable enforcement of rules, 

particularly for new entrants & SMEs. 
* Indicator: Minimum capital requirement 
for a limited liability company. (as % of 
GNI per capita) 
Baseline: 2009: 11.8%. [Target 2013: less 
than 1%]. 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Online business registration is 
functional, for one regional one-stop- 
shop (CR1) location. 

Procedures at the CR1 of Casablanca 
simplified and streamlined. 

Milestones pLqgress 

.

Online business registration pending. 
S 

Casablanca achieved with the suppression of 
one procedure (Bank certificate regarding
capital deposit when over I00,000dh). 

Liability Companies was eliminated by 

Administrative steps to create aregulatory
SIndicator: 
i 
oMinimum 
capital requirement of 
business/cost associated as % of GNI per 
limited liability companies reduced to 
capita
Baseline: 2009: 6 steps/6%. [Target 
0/symbolic value. 
Baseine:200: 6 teps16% 
[TagetThe 
2013: 3 steps/8%]. 
Legal procedures for minority 
* Indicator: % of firms which claim that the 
shareholders suits are simplified and 
rules/regulations are applied in an 
minority investor protection 
unpredictable and inconsistent way. 
strengthened. 
Baseline 2009: 60%. [Target 2013: 40%]. At least 2 key administrative processes Morocco has simplified the procedure for
se
* Indicator: Average of the Doing Business 
for registration or licensing are 
electroncxfilin an 
MEt 
indices of extent of director's liability, 
simplified by introducing e-govemment 
28 
payment oer 
e-
ease of shareholders' suit; and strength of 
tools (e.g. customs, CRI or one
minority investor protection. 
license). 
Baseline: 2009: 3 [Target 2013. 4.5].

Parliament in June 2011 
modification of the law 53-85 in February 
2011 has set up specific procedures allowing 
minority shareholders to have access to all 
information related to cases. 

government simplifications are in progress.

21

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Planned
IFC/Bank TA to support regulatory
reforms of the business environment.
Potential Bank DPL with investment
climate pillar.
9 Bank TA to the NBERC.

Delivered/Underway

reforms of the business environment.
9 Altemnative dispute resolution advisory

(IFC)
9 Corporate govemnance advisory(IFC)
9 IDF for national agency on business
environment -CNEA
9 Competitiveness DPL (FY12)
9 Competitiveness TA

More effective reform coordination and 
implementation in the business environment National Business Environment 
area. 
Commission (CNEA) formally 
instituted, operational and has led to the 
creation of at least 10 dedicated reform
project committees that are operational 
and work on the doing business 
indicators. 

* Indicator: Effectiveness indicators of 
investment climate reform commissions. 
Baseline: 2009 baseline: average score 
among 4 existing reform commissions: 
1.7 [2013 target: 2.5 for CNEA] 

This indicator is being replaced by a new
one :
* 

Increase in Doing Business
Ranking
Baseline: 124 in 2009 (time of CPS

preparation)

Outcomes progress

Minimum capital requirement for a limited
liability company is 0 % of GNI

There are still 6 administrative steps to create
a business and the cost associated is 15.7% of
income per capita. Updated DB data will be
published in September 2012.
% of firms which claim that the
rules/regulations are applied in an
unpredictable and inconsistent way was
established in the ICA 2009 and evolution
would need to be measured by a new ICA in
2013.

Average of the Doing Business index on
strength of investor protection increased to 5.
Morocco's ranking overall in Protecting
Investors increased from 153 to 97.

Milestones progress
Head of government approved National action
plan of the CNEA in 2010 and 2011, which
includes 12 reform projects.

Outcomes prozress
Improvement in the overall ranking in the
Doing Business survey from 124 in 2009 to
115 in 2010 and to 94 in 2012.

22

1.2 FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM

Government Objectives :
* Improve further access to finance for households.
* Strengthen access to finance for SMEs.
* Promote financial stability.
* Foster capital market development to improve access to finance, competition, and risk management.
Key Issues Targeted :
1- More than half of the population does not have access to banking or postal accounts and MFI weaknesses could affect over 1.2 million customers.
2- SMEs remain underserved.
3- New risks generated by the development of the financial system (e.g. real estate, interest rate, etc.)
4- Limited development of long term market instruments.
Progress at CPS-PR: Advanced progress recorded with nearly all indicators and milestones already met. Indicators and Milestones for the planned Financial Sector DPL-2 will be
specified once the DPL is prepared and will be captured by the next CPS. The new MSME project's interim results are not expected until late-2013, beyond the timeframe of this
CPS-PR: hence they will be incorporated into the next CPS, including indicators with regard to women's access to finance.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

A restructured financial sector allowing for 
sustainable expansion of access to finance by 
households. 

S 

Milestones prQgress 

Post bank was set up. 

* Indicator: Increase in number of total deposit 
accounts relative to the population. 
Baseline: 43% (banks and the post office) inthe 
December 2008 

Initiation of the restructuring of The restructuring of the MFI industry was initiated 
MFI industry.

Regulation (e.g. on govemnance and classification) and 

* Reduction in the NPL ratio of MFIs 
Baseline: 9% in June 2009. 

Strengthening of regulation and 
supervision of MFIs. 

supervision (e.g. increased on-site verifications) of 
MFI were strengthened

Establihed crdit 
condciveat

SE 
toes proress(FY10)
Number of total deposit accounts relative to the 
population is 52% (Dec. 2011) 

inrastrucureemoe 

The NPL ratio of MFIs is 6.2% (Dec. 2010) 

Established credit infrastructure more conducive to 
SME finance 

Operational new credit bureau. 

* Inicaor:Incrasein 
he umbe ofmonhly 
consultations to the credit bureau. 

Reformed public credit
Reomdpbi 
rdtRate 

Milestones progress 

New credit bureau is operational 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status
Planned
Financial Sector DPL.
9 Technical assistance, funded

by country program and
FIRST.

IFC ongoing support to

banking sector and improved

financial infrastructure.

Financial Sector DPL 1

Financial Sector DPL 2
(FY 13)
t MSME Investment loan
(FY12)
S Strengthening Crisis
Preparedness and Processes
(FIRST)
9 Strategy and Instruments to
Establish Reliable Interest

Benchmarks (FIRST)

Baseline: 2,000 consultations in November 2009 

guarantee scheme. 

Public credit guarantee scheme reformed 

9 Introduction of Covered

23

Outcomes progress 

Bonds
9 Review of framework for

The number of monthly consultations to the credit 
mobile payments
bureau reached 79,609 in Dec. 2011 (the large increase 
Bank Govemance Review
over baseline is because the credit bureau had just been s Access to finance advisory
set up at the time of the baseline) 
creation of credit bureau and

Milestones and Outcomes pLQgress 
The two draft laws on the new capital market and 
insurance authorities have made progress but are still 
pending Parliamentary approval (adoption by Council 
of govemnment was in August 2011), as requested by 

the newly elected Govemment for all key draft laws

capacity building to the
microfinance (IFC).
9 IFC investment in local banks
and microfinance institutions
focused on women and
MSMEs.

Better identification of risks in the financial system 
through the introduction of fully independen 
su!pervisors. 

Fully independent insurance 
and securities supervisors. 

Enhanced risk assessment tools 
Indicator: Establishment of new insurance 
Baseline: 70utinessi Juner200
for banks and other financial 

institutions, 

* 

* 

supervisor 
Baseline: none
Indicator: Establishment of new capital market
supervisor
Baseline: none

Improved liquidity of the benchmark yield curve, 
creation of new instruments (e.g. covered bonds). 

* Indicator: Reduction in the number of lines of 
Treasury bills 

Long term credits no more 

indexed on rates at issuance of 
long term government bonds. 
duration of 

govemment debt stabilized or 
increasing. 

Legislation introducing 

covered bonds.

Milestones Progress
Long term credits no more indexed on rates at issuance
of long term government bonds (MOF order dated 17
March 2010)
Average duration of govemment debt stabilized or
hAverage 
increasing: 2011 data is not yet available but should
show a significant increase as the govemrment issued
more MT-LT bonds. The average maturity was 5 years

10 months in 2008 and 5 years 2 months in 2010 (2011
likely to be above 5 years 10 months but data not yet
available)

Legislation introducing covered bonds in progress

Outcomes pLQgress

Number of lines of Treasury bills - data not yet

mobileeavailable

24

1.3 SKILLS AND EMPLOYMENT

Government Objectives :
* Improve access to and quality of higher education (and vocational education and training [VET]) system.
* Improve labor market information systems.
* Extend active labor market programs.
* Set-up an unemployment insurance scheme.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Inadequacy of higher education (and VET) supply to demand.
2- Knowledge of labor market dynamics is insufficient to inform policies and program.
3- Labor market rigidity and lack of income protection mechanisms hamper labor mobility and productivity.
Progress at CPS-PR: Moderate progress recorded to date although the recent delivery of the first DPL has greatly strengthened the Bank's assistance. Since the CPS was approved,
the Bank's program has evolved with the delivery of the Skills and Employment DPL which necessitates revisions to the results matrix to capture this engagement. All previous
indicators and milestones were dropped and replaced here by those supported by the Skills and Employment DPL.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Matching skills developed within the vocational training and 
higher education systems to the needs of the labor market 

C f l-o 

Indicator 1: Rate of intemal efficiency of vocational training 
programs covered by a programmatic contract 
Baseline: 75% (2009/10) 
Target: >90% (2012/13) 

Indicator 2: University graduation rate in open-enrollment 
faculties 
Baseline: 64% (2009/10) 

Target: 69% (20 12/13) 

Labor Ministry's Vocational 
Training Department signs with 

ten ( 10) providers 15 (including 
private providers) programmatic 

contracts (with development 
plans) in line with the new 
vocational training strategy 

Unieritis ntodue ouresto 

improve intemal efficiency (i.e. 
improve graduation rates) 

Milestones progress 
Vocational training strategy under 

preparation. Strategy will drive 
content of programmatic contracts to 

be signed between Labor Ministry and
providers. 

The 15 public universities provide 

Planned
9 Skills Development and Employment

DPL.
9 AAA program envisaged.

Delivered/Underway
9 Skills Development and Employment
DP (FY12)

during the first 2 semesters, at least 

80%, on average, of their bachelor- 
level academic'6 programs in their 
open-enrollment faculties, a course 

module of 80 hours in foreign 
languages, computer literacy, 

* Employment TA ongoing. Its

objective is to strengthen
Govemment's capacity to: (i) design
the 2012-2106 employment

promotion strategy; (ii) strengthen
the labor market information system;

and (iii) prepare the Vocational
Training Law.

0 Growth, Employment and Poverty
PESW

IFC

________________________1_____1__ 

communication and study skills, 
These courses are designed to improve 

leamning quality and intemnal efficiency 

Outcomes progress p 
Indicators are revised in line with the

design of the Skills & Employment

DPL and the targets are set for 2012-
2013

15 Amongst the following providers: National Vocational Training Office; Agriculture; Tourism; Fisheries; Works; Crafts; Youth & Sport; Solidarity; Interior; Justice; Education; Chambers ofCommerce.
16 "Licencesfondamentales", as opposed to "licencesMprofessionnelles"

25

Improving the effectiveness of intermediation services, 
including active labor market programs ("stock") 

Indicator 3: Number of new enrolments with ANAPEC, 
including proportion of non-graduates 7 , par year, by gender 

Baseline: 130,000, including 1% of non-graduates (2011) 

Target: 150,000, including 1000 of non-graduates (2013) 

Improving- 

quality 

* 

Indicator4 : Number of firms, formerly operating in the 
informal sector, registered annually for professional tax 

Baseline : n.a. (2010) 

Target: 14,000 (2012) - cumulative 

ANAPEC has implemented a
2009-2011 plan to increase its 

number of local offices and 
employment counselors.

Government adopts in Cabinet a 

draft law amending Law No. 

5 1/99 establishing ANAPEC, in 

order to extend ANAPEC 
coverage to non-graduates.
eob 
crooress
incentive to become formal; as a 

Micro-enterprises have an 

result they benefit from public 
services that will boost their 
productivity. 

Milestones progress

Increased number of ANAPEC offices

from 50 in 2008 to 77 in 2011.

Increased number of job counselors

from 278 in 2008 to 349 in 2011
Outcomes proZress
Data not available, target set for 2013

Milestones 
Finance Ministry implements a set of

measures to encourage the
formalization of micro-firms, namely:
- income tax is reduced from 300 
to
150% for businesses whose after-tax

turnover is equal to or less than 3

million DH;
- income tax amnesty upon
registration for professional tax
("patente") (i.e. transition from

informal to the first level of

formality)18

Outcomes progress
6,449 of firms, formerly operating in
the informal sector, registered
annually for professional tax in 2011

17 Non-graduates are those who have not completed high school .1 

1 

This is a temporary measure, for 2011 and 2012, which maynbe renewed after evaluation.

i or do not have a vocational training diploma.

26

1.4 TRADE AND COMPETITIVENES - Added to the CPS Results Matrix

Government Objectives :
. Modernizing the legal and institutional framework of foreign trade.
* 
Streamlining trade logistics at the ports of entry
.
Strengthening the institutional framework for the competition policy
Key Issues Targeted:
1. Enhancement of transparency and predictability on the regulatory framework applicable to safety and hygiene standards for local producers and importers
2. Reduction of administrative burden (time and costs) and increased transparency for importers and exporters.
3. Reduction of dominant positions and unfair competition.

Progress at CPS-PR: This is a new results area that has been added into the CPS-PR which reflects the focus of the Bank's Competitiveness DPL.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Modernizing the legal and institutional framework of foreign trade 

Number of controls on imported products: 

Baseline : 71,000 (2011) 
Target (2013): over 100,000 

Streamlining trade logistics at the ports of entry 

Reduce the total time (discharge outlet) for containers 

Baseline: 2010 average 
Target (2013): Reduce by 25% by 2013 

Strengthening the institutional framework for the competition policy 

Number of cases of self-referral, investigation and sanctions 
imposed by the National Competition Council. 

Baseline: 0 
Target: 4 official investigations by end 2013 

Delivered/Underway
Competitiveness DPL
(FY13)

The Head of Government has issued the Milestones progress 
Planned
implementing Decree provided by the 
The law No 24-09 dated August 17, 2011 on Not planned in CPS
Law 24-09 dated August 17, 2011 on the 
the safety of products and services.
safety of products and services. 
Publication has been approved by 
Parliament and published in the National 
Gazette No. 5984 of October 6, 2011. 
Outcomes progress
Outcome set for 2013
The IT system managed by PORTNET Milestones progress 
for data exchange is operational and 
The company PORTNET in charge of 
used by the key public authorities and 
operating/managing the IT system for data 
private trade operators involved in 
exchange between public authorities and 
import and export operations(Customs, 
private trade operators has been established
freight forwarders, banks, Foreign Trade 
by its shareholders on January 19, 2012.
Department, National Office of Food 
Outcomes progress
Sanitary Security (ONSSA)) 
Outcome set for 2013
The Head of Government issues the 
Milestones progress
implementing Decree provided by the 
The Government Council has approved the
Law establishing the National 
draft Law modifying the Competition and
Competition Council (Conseil National 
Freedom of Pricing Law No 06-99,
de la Concurrence). 
reinforcing the powers and independence of
the National Competition Council (Conseil
National de la Concurrence)
Outcomes progress: Outcome set for 2013

AAA on data and
statistics - including
simulation of industrial
and trade policies

27

Pillar 2: SERVICE DELIVERY TO CITIZENS

2.1 PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT

Government Objectives:
* Increase transparency, accountability and performance measurement of the budget.
* Progress in implementing key components of HR reform.
* Consolidate and control civil service payroll evolution.
* Simplification of PA procedures and greater availability of on line services.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Insufficient visibility of policies in their medium-term budgetary implications which would allow for budgetary allocation decisions in a multiyear framework.
2- Need to improve HR management to enhance civil service performance including in deconcentrated entities.
3- Strengthen payroll management to foster control of overall public wage bill and promote macroeconomic stability.
4- Inefficient and nontransparent procedures undermine quality and reliability of PA processes.
Progress at CPS-PR: Moderate progress recorded based mainly on PARL IV DPL actions. Some good progress on reducing the wage bill was achieved in 2010 but was then reversed
due to Arab Spring pressures. Indicators and Milestones for the planned Governance and Accountability DPL-l will be specified once the DPL is prepared and will captured in the next
CPS. The future results in this context will include some of the activities proposed in the main text.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Multiannual budgetary planning integrated with the process of 
preparation of the Budget Law. 

The objective is to consolidate the link of multi-year performance 
budgeting with the annual budget law preparation process so that 
MTEFs constitute the central tool of sectoral allocations of resources 
based on sectoral priorities of the govemment. 
* Indicator: Number of additional ministries that routinely do a 
Medum-ermExpndiur 
Frmewrk MTE).is 
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).
Baseline: 12 ministries, in October 2009. 

Increase number of 
departments that 
elaborate performance 
budgets from 25 
(October 2009) to 30 
by end 2010. 

The pending HRM policy adopted by the government. This concems 
the decree on Harmonization of Civil Service Status of "Editors- 
R6dacteurs" and "Technicians." 
* Indicator: Decree adopted by the govemment. 
Baseline: Preparatory background work has started. 

Preparation of 
strategic staffing 
frameworks and

generalized use of
GPEEC tools in HR
management by key
ministries.

28

Milestones progmss 
The number of departments that elaborate 
performance budgets, at the level of paragraphs, 
has been extended to 34 ministries. 
Outcomes progress 
In progress. More than 16 ministries have
developed over 19 sector or sub-sector MTEFs. 
Most ministries are familiar with this tool, but it 
not yet fully operational, in the absence of a 
global MTEF and multi annual budget ceilings. 
The new organic budget law intends to address 
this shortcoming, by introducing a multi annual 
budget perspective and a programmatic approach. 
No data available 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Planned
9 PARL IV (FY09) -Delivered.
9 P-ESW.
9 PER.
9 E-Govemment TA.

Planned/Underway
9 Govemance DPL being prepared
(FY 13)
9 E-Gov TA
9 Compensation Reform
9PninRfr
. Peon Roefrmac 
Corruption
9 Public Administration Reform TA

ni

n 

The wage bill is in line with the government medium term target of 
10 percent of GDP. 
* Indicator: Share of Wage Bill in GDP. 
Baseline: 10.3% in 2009. Preliminary estimate. Final estimate 
available February 2010. 

Key ministries 
actively involved in 
the control of their 
wage bill and payroll 
credit management. 

Milestones progress
Although the payroll remains centrally managed
by the Ministry of Finance, key Ministries, such
as Education and Agriculture have taken a more
active role (and increased their capacity) in the
management of their personnel costs.

Given the Government's response to the Arab Spring - including 
wage increases for civil servants - this indicator is being dropped 
from the CPS. The focus of the Bank's program has shifled away 
from a support for a traditional administrative reform agenda 
towards the improvement of transparency, accountability and

Outcomes prozress

The wage bill fell to 10.20 of GDP in 2010 but
increased again to 10.90 GDP in 2011 due to
general increases in the salaries of all civil

E-government is introduced to siMplify PA procedures including for 
service delivery. 

Institutional 

spring.
Milestones prog0ress
On May 21, 2009, Morocco issued Decree 2-08-

* Indicator: Number of Government Priority projects (15 listed) fully 
implemented. 
Baseline: None in 2009. 

framework for e- 
government in place 
and operational. 

444, creating a new institutional framework for e-
government leadership, the National Council for
Information Technologies and digital economy.

E-procurement and e- 
customs systems are 
operational.

At least 80% of the central administration's
procurement offers, terms of references, and
results of the public bids are available online.

All customs declarations are now processed
online, excluding payments.

Outcomes progress

Over 9 Government Priority projects (15 listed)
were fully implemented; e-Consulat, Integrated
management of public expenditure, Online VAT
claims, Paying Corporate Tax, Paying Income
tax, Setting up and electronic certification
authority, Employee online social claims,
Customs declarations.

Other applications are on their way to being
implemented: Online bidding for public tenders,
enterprise creation, Common identifier and inter-
operability among administrations.

29

2.2 QUALITY AND ACCESS IN EDUCATION

Government Objectives :
* Achieve universal compulsory basic education by 2015.
* Improve system performance (teaching, management and stewardship).
* Mobilize and utilize resources effectively.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Large number of school-aged remains excluded from the system, with high repetition and dropout rates.
2- Weak external efficiency and quality of the education system.
3- Weak institutional performance in teaching, management and stewardship.
Progress at CPS-PR: Moderate progress recorded. While there has been some progress towards the outcomes and milestones (particularly in the area of access), it is clear that it is
falling short of what was expected (particularly in the area of completion, as an imperfect proxy for quality). The Bank is deliberately not changing the results matrix outcomes or
milestones for this sector as the vehicle of support is the Education DPL which is fully based on the Government's program, indicators and targets. These have thus been maintained.
The thrust of the Bank's support to education has evolved during the CPS and has been on quality and not on access so there are better results on putting in place the evaluation system
rather than building schools or enrollment rates. The CPS PR has introduced gender disaggregated indicators given the enhanced focus on gender in the CPS-PR and the availability of
this data as part of the program. Any outcomes linked with the future scale-up of the Tayssir CCT program (for which the Bank provides TA) will be captured as part of overall
monitoring of the education program, especially as regards female enrollment, drop-out and repetition rates.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Increased net enrollment rates for primary and 
lower secondary education. 

Number of new schools built under Milestones progress 
Gov't Education Emergency Plan. 
Number of new schools built: 

* Indicator: primary education net enrollment rate. 

Baseline: 90.5% (2008/09). 

Targets: 91.9% (2009/10), 93.2% (2010/11), 
94.6% (2011/12). 
lower secondary net enrollment rate.& 
SIndicator: 
t 
e 
Baseline: 42.7% so 
renl 

Baseline: 
42.7% (2008/109)6.0%(001) 
Targets: 51.5% (2009/10), 62.0% (2010/1 1),

74.7% (2011/12).________747 21/2.Outcomes 
Additional gender indicators added 

Primary education: 113 (2010), 46 

( 
Lower secondary education: 158 

Primary education: 32 (2009 & 2010) 

Lower secondary education: 39 (2009 & 

(1 

Community schools (i.e. combined 

primary/lower secondary) - 5 (2009 & 2010) 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

9 Education DPL
9 AAA: Impact evaluation of conditional

cash transfer program in rural primary

schools

Skills Development & Labor Market
DPL

Quality Assurance
Public Administration Reform DPL

AAA: PER-PEFA PETS-QSDF

p=ozess 

Planned/Underway

Primary education net enrollment rate: 93.9% 

* Education DPL (DPLI completed,

96.4% (20 10/11) 

DPL2 in preparation)

AAA: Impact evaluation of conditional

* Indicator: female primary education net 

" nictr:fmaeprmryeuctonnt(2009/10), 

enrollment rate: Baseline: 89.1% (2008/09).Loeseodredctoneenolntahtasfrpgamirulpiay

Targets: 92.5% (2010/11), 94.2% (2011/12). 

rate: 48.0% (2009/10), 51.0% (2010/11) 

sh 

ta 

colected,rdra prt

* Indicator: female lower secondary net enrollment 
rate: Baseline: 42.4% (2008/09)Skills 
TrtBsel: 6 
.4% (200/9) 

Female primary education net enrollment 
rate: 92.71 
Female lower secondary net enrollment rate: 

completed, final report under way).
& Employment (FY2)
AAA: Evaluation & Quality Assurance
PER reports being finalized

47.3% (2009/10), 50.2% (2010/11) &PETS-QSDF 

(PETS TORs developed).

30

Reduced repetition rates for primary and lower 
secondary education. 

Pupil-teacher ratios: 
Primary education: 28:1 (2009/10), 

Milestones progress 
Primary pupil-teacher ratio: 28:1 (2009/10), 

. Governance DPL (FY13)
* PPP in Education (IFC)

* Indicator: Primary repetition rate. 
Baseline: 12.3% (2008/09). 
Targets: 9.1% (2009/10), 6.7% (2010/11), 5.0% 
(2011/12). 
* Indicator: lower secondary repetition rate. 
Baseline: 15.2% (2008/09).
Targets: 13.0% (2009/10), 11.1% (2010/11), 9.5% 

(2010/11), 27:1 (20 
Lower secondary education: 24:1
(2009/10), 24:1(2010/11), 24:1 
(2011/12). 

28:1 (2010/11)

Lower secondary pupil-teacher ratio: 24:1
(2009/10), 24:1 (2010/11)
Outcomes prozress

Primary euai 

ret 

rt:1.0

Lower secondary education repetition rate:

16i10o 

f20a1) 

16e30o (2010/11)

(2009/10), 7.3 
(2010/11)
Lower secondary female repetition rate:

12.1% (2009/10), 12.3% (2010/11)

Milestones progress

Morocco participated in TIMSS 2011 &

PIRLS 2011

Oucmspors

National Learning Assessment System
(PNEA) established and 2011 learning
outcomes survey to be held before end of
school year.
New upper secondary education strategy at
early stages of preparation

(2011/12).(2010,93o2101)

Aditonl1ene/idiatrsade 

Additional,zender indicators added16%(20/),6.%2001)

* 

* 

Indicator: Primary female repetition rate: 
Baseline: 10% (2008/09). 
Targets: 5.9% (2010/11), 4.5% (2011/12). 
Indicator: lower secondary female repetition 
rate: Baseline: 11.5% (2008/09)

Targets: 8.92 

(2010/1(1), 7.9/ 

(2011/12).

Improved education quality with a focus on 

restructuring teachers' training and learning 

evaluation. 

* Indicator: Establishment of national learning 

assessment system. 
Baseline: Not yet established (2008/09). 
Target: New upper secondary education strategy 
is developed and implemented by 2012; National 
learning assessment system has been established 
and at least one learning outcomes survey has 
been carried out (with analysis and dissemination) 
by 2012.
Improved management capacity and increased 
accountability of results at all levels, within the 
context of decentralization. 

* Indicator: Proportion of lower secondary teachers 

working the full complement of hours assigned. 

Baseline: 3 .5 %o (2008/09). Targets: 4 O.5 % 

(2007/08), 53.8 

(2009/10), 71.5 

(2011/12).

(these are triggers and indicatorsfor the DPL 
to aorinl 
they are being maintained even though no data 
i
available)atssigned:gnsssstn

Continued engagement in 

international learning assessment 

surveys: Trends in International 

Mathematics and Science Study 

(TIMSS 2011); Progress inroress
International Reading Literacy 
Study (PIRLS 2011). 

Implementation of performance 
evaluation system for school 
principals: Define job profile 

Milestones progress
School principal performance evaluation
system not yet implemented. Job profile

(2010); Implement training plan in 

line with job profile (2011 + 2012).

being defined.

Outcomes progress

fl 
woriengeal fu 

co 

nary 

hrs

31

2.3 HEALTH SECTOR REFORM

Government Objectives:
* Reduce the burden of major health conditions.
* Reduce inequity in access to services affecting poor and rural populations.
* Improve financing and efficiency of the sector.
* Improve governance of the sector.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Dual burden of non-communicable diseases and poor maternal and child health outcomes.
2- Public financing of health services remains inadequate, resulting, among other things, in high out-of-pocket expenditures.
3- Limited access to affordable and quality pharmaceutical products (quantity scarce in public sector, prices high in the private sector).
Progress at CPS-PR: Limited progress recorded. The Bank's Health DPL preparation was put on hold by the Government due to non-conclusive discussions between Ministry of
Health and Ministry of Finance. Therefore, the results matrix outlined in the CPS in this area is no longer valid as all indicators and baselines were expected to be established during
preparation of the Health DPL. Hence, they are all being dropped here. Should the DPL's preparation re-start, then Indicators and Milestones will be captured by the next CPS.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Bank Group Program Instruments/Status

Integrated management of non-communicable disease 
(NCD) prevention and treatment at primary provider level. 

* Indicator: Indicators and baselines will be set during 
preparation of the proposed Health DPL. 

More comprehensive nutrition activities integrated in the 
provision of maternal and child health services, 
Indicators and baselines will be set during 
preparation of the proposed Health DPL. 

Indicators have been dropped due to change in Bank 

engagement 

Regional budgets are allocated based on need and 

performance, and capacity of regions to plan and assess 
service delive1y is enhanced. 

* Indicator: Indicators and baselines will be set preparation 
of the proposed Health DPL. 
Indicators have been dropped due to change in Bank 
engagement
Good quality and affordable pharmaceuticals are accessible 
to the population in public health facilities.: Indicators and 
baselines will be set by March31, 2010 during preparation 
of the proposed Health DPL. 
Indicators have been dropped due to change in Bank 
engagement

National Commission on NCD set-up, 
and prevention and treatment included

in primary care providers' cahiers de 

charge. Management tools and 
protocols are in place, training and 

dissemination conducted. 

aIndicator: 
i 

c 
protocoinearing 
Contrats programs level effectively 

enforced in all regions. 
Monitoring system to assess capacity 

and performance of regions is in
place. Measureable improvements in
governance m health facilities.

National Pharmaceutical Agency
created.
Following stakeholders' consultations,
a national pharmaceutical Policy
revised and approved by parliament.

32

Planned

*Health DPL/TA

PPP Health (IFC)
Delivered/Underw

* DPL preparation was initiated then
cancelled. Discussions are now 
progress with new Government
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey

(PETS): Ongoing

Public Expenditure Review (PER):

completion

Users of Public Facilities Survey:

Results transmitted to the MoH in early
2011.

2.4 VULNERABILITY AND SOCIAL EXCLUSION

Government Objectives:
* Reduce rural poverty, urban social exclusion and vulnerability.
* Empower poor and vulnerable groups for their own development.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- High level of rural poverty, social exclusion and vulnerability.
2- Insufficient access to/use of basic infrastructure, social services and economic opportunities, by poor and vulnerable groups.
3- Lack of convergence of poverty alleviation policies and implementation mechanism across government agencies.
4- Centrally-driven approach dealing with poverty and social exclusion, with little room for participation and empowerment of the stakeholders.

Progress at CPS-PR: Advanced Progress recorded based on the successful completion of INDH-1 where many outcomes have surpassed their targets. Just after Board discussion of
the CPS, and as per the Government's request, the four original PDO indicators of the INDH project were amended and increased to five to better capture the outcomes of
inclusiveness, accountability and transparency, and to measure the impact on the target population. The reviewed PDO of the INDH are now reflected here as outcomes to ensure
better alignment. New indicators have been added for the first year of implementation of INDH-2 (2012/13) which is covered by the CPS period.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Use of services and infrastructure 
* Number of persons (men, women and youth) reporting 
increased use of basic infrastructure and socioeconomic 
services created by INDH, broken down by program 
(rural/urban/vulnerable/ crosscutting) 

Mstonesroress 

Improved targeting of poor and 
vulnerable groups. 

Opinion/Household surveys conducted 

Improved targeting of poor and 
vulnerable groups occurred under 
INDHI and has further improved in 

the design of INDH2. 

Baseline: 
Target: 
Men 0% 
Men 70% 
Women 0% Women 50% 
Youth 0% 
Youth 30% 

Transparency 
* % of CLDH, CPDH and CRDH's decisions published, relating 
to the projects approved/rejected and annual physical and 
financial reports 

Baseline: 0% 

Target: 95%

Tre:9%Outcomes 

Accountability & ownership 

0 u/o Or projects implemented by communities, NGO, Communes 

every year. 

Indend 
2013. 

acalutin 

survey 

Convergent policies and 
implementation mechanisms for 
poverty alleviation programs agreed 
within the deconcentration 

/decentralization agenda. 

Independent impact evaluation survey 
conducted in 2011 

- decentralization

agenda has not evolved as expected in

Morocco and the new Constitution 
now structures this as a part of overall 
regionalization -
it is thus premature
to evaluate the milestone 

progress 
73-84% of men, 66-75% of women 

and 41-65% of youth are reporting 

increased use of basic infrastructure 

and socioeconomic services created
by INDH, broken down by program
(rural/urban/vulnerable/ crosscutting)

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Planned
9 Ongoing INDH Project
(SWAP, 2007-2010).
9 INDH 2, 2011-2015 (Request
for WB's support received).

9 PESW.

9 Ongoing IFC support to
microfmance sector
(investment and advisory)

. INDH 2 (FY12)
e Breaking Barriers to Youth

9 Govemance of Service

Delivery to Citizens

9 Poverty PESW

9 JSDF Grant $2.85m
Promoting Accessibility for

Persons with Limited

Mobility

33

Baseline : 
Target: 
Rural 0% 
Rural 60% 
Urban 0% 
Urban 70% 
Crosscutting 0% Cross-cutting 70% 

Inclusiveness 
* % of women in CLDH, CPDH and CRDH. 

Baseline : 
Target:
CLDH 0% CLDH14% 
CPDH 0% 
CPDH 14% 
CRDHO% CRDH7%

* % of youth in CLDH, CPDH and CRDH. 

Baseline: 0%
Target :7%

100 of CLDH, CPDH and CRDH's
decisions published, relating to the
projects approved/rejected and annual
physical and financial reports

90% Rural, 72% Urban and 79%
Cross-cutting projects are
implemented by communities, NGO
and Communes.

17% of women in CLDH, 17% in
CPDH and 11% in CRDH

12% of youth in CLDH, CPDH and
CRDH

* 

* 

* 

ADDITIONAL INDICATORS ADDED AT THE CPS-PR
Increase in the % of girls and boys who reside in the 
No milestone being introduced as 
educational dormitories (Dar Talib, Dar Taliba), graduating 
indicators are expected to be reached 
to the next grade. Baseline: 45%, Target 50% by end-2012 
at end-2012 as per the INDH-2 results
Increase in the % of women and youth (18 - 35 years old) in matrix
local governance bodies: CLDH & CPDH. Baseline: 17%
women and 12% youth. Targets: 20% women, 15% youth
by end-2012
Increase in % of IGA implementing agencies receiving
capacity building. Baseline: 20% Targets 30%

Under Preparation
INDH 2 (FY12)

34

2.5 TRANSPORT

Government Objectives:
* Rural Roads: Improve access of rural dwellers to basic infrastructure and social services with all weather roads.
* Urban Transport: develop the institutional framework, improve efficiency of services and infrastructure, and ensure the environmental and social sustainability.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Rural Roads Accessibility: only 54% of the rural population has access to roads that can be used all times.
2- Responsibility over maintenance of the 3,000km of unclassified roads is unclear.
3- Inefficient provision of transport services and infrastructure due also to weak institutional capacity.
Progress at CPS-PR: Advanced progress recorded. Indicators and milestones for the planned Urban Transport DPL-2 will be specified at the time of DPL preparation and will
be captured by the next CPS. The CPS-Completion Report will provide information on the on-going social impact evaluation of the Rural Roads program as data will be
available by then - especially as regards girls schooling and women's access to health facilities in project areas. However, indicators for these results are not being introduced
here as they are not captured in the results framework of the Bank's current Rural Roads project. Should the Bank provide future financing for the next phase of the rural roads
program, this will capture these socio-economic results and thus they will be included in the next CPS. The JSDF grant for supporting accessibility of people with reduced
mobility expects to achieve results only by end-2013 which is beyond the time-frame of the current CPS: results of this activity will thus also be captured in the future CPS.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Increased accessibility of rural population to all-weather 
roads - from 65% (2009) to 80% (2012). 

Rural Roads financed by the 
CFR -4,600 km of roads 

Milestones prqgress 

Indicator: Percentage of rural population that have 
access to all weather-roads. 

Baseline: 65% (2009) 

Target: 80% (2012). 

launched under the program. 
Rural Roads financed under the 

DRCR - 3,200 km of roads 

launched (the total of 7,800 km 

represents the first phase of a 

11,000 km of rural roads launched under the 
program. 7,000 km have been completed and 

open to traffic and 1,000 km partially open to 

Outcomes pnQgress 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Planned
* Rural Roads Project;
9 Second Rural Roads Project
and Additional Financing.

9 Urban Transport Sector

Policy program (DPL 1 and

2).

Sustainable maintenance of unclassified roads. 

program of approximately 

Percentage of rural population that has access to 

* TA to reinforce the Port

* Indicator: Action plan for sustainability of unclassified 
rural roads in place. 
Baseline: No plan prepared 
Target: Plan implemented by 2012. 

15,600 km of rural roads). 

sustainability of unclassified 
rural roads being prepared 

rbanprens and firt the tonal 

Efficient planning and management of the urban transpo 

sector. 
" Indicator 1: Number of cities over 500,000 inhabitants 

which have established an urban transport planning and 
management authority 

Baseline: 1 city (Casablanca) 

Target: 4 cities by 2013 

Establishment of urban 
transport agencies in the main 

eigpeae

ina 

od 

ation 

level. 

Formulation of adequate urban 

transport strategies and 

* Indicator 2: Number of cities over 500,000 inhabitants 

vestment plans in the main 

35

all-weather roads: 72% (December 2011) 
Sustainability of unclassified rural roads has 
advanced with the constitution of an inter-
ministerial committee to finalize a series of 
measures to secure sufficient financial resources 

rnprgny
and appropriate administrative arrangements for 

sustained maintenance of these roads.
Milestones prgress 

1 city (Casablanca) has established an urban 
tasotgec.and 

5 cities (Tangers, Casablanca, Rabat, T&touan, 

Marrakech) have adopted adequate urban 
transport strategies (long term multimode urban 

Authority (ANP).
fCilitaton 
ad

infrastructure study for
Maghreb countries.

9 PPP in transport (IFC)

Rural Roads Project;

9 Second Rural Roads Project
Additional Financing.

TA to reinforce the Port
authority (ANP)

9 Cross-border trade and

facilitation study for
Maghreb countries

which have adopted a long term multimodal urban 
transport master plan 
Baseline: 1 city (Casablanca) 
Target: 6 cities by 2013. 

with high economic returns 

* Indicator: Central Government share of urban transport 
infrastructure investment funding in cities over 500,000 
inhabitants. 
Baseline: To be established through the first UT DPL. 

Target: 20%o in 2013. 

urban area, 

transport master plan). Marrakech has 
formulated an investment plan. 

Improved technical and 
regulatory framework for 
public transport, urban roads, 
and traffic. 

The National Commission for Urban Transport 
(CNDU) has been established but is yet to 
become fully functional. It is supposed to 
oversee the implementation of the national 
strategies on urban transport and coordinate the 

technical and regulatory efforts between the 
various relevant ministers. The regulation of 
public transport and traffic management is
awaiting the completion of important technical

studies, particularly for traffic management and
bus route restructuring. The studies are

currently ongoing in Casablanca, Marrakech,
and Rabat.

Outcomes prozress
1 city (Casablanca) has established an urban

transport planning authority. Its management

functions are yet limited.

5 cities (Tangers, Casablanca, Rabat, T6touan,

Marrakech) have adopted a long term
multimode urban transport master plan.

Two urban infrastructure investments are
relevant for this indicator:

1) Tramway in Rabat, estimated to cost 3.8bn

DH. The exact figure of the central government
share of the funding is not available, but it is
estimated to be over 200. Government funding

towards the tramway is channeled through a
company responsible for land planning, and is
the entity which will be investing in the
tramway as well as in other infrastructure

projects. This funding amounts to 3bn DH
2) Tramway in Casablanca, estimated to cost
6bn DH. Central government funding is

DH, corresponding to a share of 45D

36

* Urban Transport DPL 1
(FY11)
* Urban Transport DPL 2
(FY13)
* Transport and Energy
Efficient AAA
* JSDF Grant ($2.85m)
Promoting Accessibility for

Persons with Limited
Mobility

*a2,700bn 

2.6 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR REFORM

Government Objectives:
* Increased competitiveness and diversification of the agricultural sector to sustain stronger agricultural growth and employment.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Low quality domestic marketing infrastructure (wholesale markets and slaughterhouses) that inhibits price formation.
2- Inefficient management of water resources in irrigation sector.
3- Under-performing public sector support and services.
Progress at CPS-PR: Advanced progress recorded mainly due to successful completion of the first DPL Plan Maroc Vert. Indicators and Milestones for the planned Plan Maroc
Vert DPL-2 will be specified when the DPL is prepared and will be captured by the next CPS.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to 
influence 

Improved integration of smallholders into 
domestic markets. 
* Indicator: Million tons domestically 
produced fresh fruit and vegetable sold in 
national wholesale markets. 
Baseline: 2.2 million tons 
Target: 4 million tons. 
IMproved irrigation water management. 

" Indicator 1: area equipped with drip 

irrigation systems. 

Target: 2013: 360,000 ha. 

2: % O&M cost recovery in 5DP
ORMVAs 
Baseline: 2007: 76%. 
Target: 88% 

Target for this indicator changed from 7 to 5 
ORMVAs andfrom 100% to 88% to align with 

indicators oPPlan Maroc Vert DPL2 

IMproved public sector sUpport and services to 
smallholders. 
9 Indicator: # of Pillar 11 projects 
implemented in 2013. 
Baseline: 50 Pillar 11 projects (2009) 
Target: 290 Pillar 11 projects (2013) 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Public private partnerships in 
wholesale markets and 
slaughterhouses piloted. 

-Increased on-farm use of water 

saving 
Basels-Increased cost recovery by 

ORMVAs. 

SIndicator 

Water resource plans approved by 

inter-ministerial body. 

Milestones prqgress 
Public private partnerships in wholesale markets and 
slaughterhouses not yet achieved (this milestone is now 
lined to the Plan Maroc Vert DPL2) 
Outcomes pror 
Improved integration of smallholders into domestic markets: 
2.7 million tons sold in wholesale markets 
Milestones progress 

-Increased on-farm use of water saving irrigation 

technology: 
pptechnolos 
-Increased cost recovery by ORMVAs: Partially achieved 

-Inter-ministerial body has approved water resource plans 

Outcomes progress 
Drip irrigation water management: 249,605 ha (end 2010, no 
data available for 2011) 

%O&M cost recovery in the 5 ORM\VAs - no progress yet 
recorded. This indicator will now be linked to the DPL2. 

-Introduction of transparent, 
competitive and participatory 
procedures in the identification and 
implementation of PMV Pillar 11 
projects. 
-Increased stakeholder involvement 
in the programming of public 

services, 
-Introduction of PPP in public 
services delivery. 

Milestones progress
Introduction of transparent, competitive and participatory 
procedures in the identification and implementation of PMV 
Pillar 11 projects: Achieved 
Increased stakeholder involvement in the programming of 
public services: Achieved 
Introduction of Public Private Partnerships in public services 

delivery: not yet achieved. Milestone linked to the DPL2
Outcomes prPgress
-112 Pillar 
projects implemented by February 2012.

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Planned
9 Bank and FAO
technical assistance
on PPP models.
9 Potential Bank DPL
with domestic market
system pillar.
* World Bank and ADB

investment operations

in irrigation sector.
a 
tannoewoni

modsael fo PPMAs

wi 

pillar,

l 
igation
with Pillar 1 and

public services pillar.
* IFC investment in

agribusiness sector

Delivered/Underway
PMV DPL 1 (FY1 1)
Oumn Er Rbia Irrigation
Project (FY10)
T 
nPP
PMV DPL 2 (FY 13)

37

2.7 SOCIAL PROTECTION REFORM

Government Objectives:
* System reform to consolidate SP: (i) Design and implement a more equitable, efficient and coherent package of social protection programs; (ii) As part of the above, reform the oil
and food subsidies programs.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Main safety net remains the general subsidies provided by the Caisse de Compensation which in the medium to long term may become unsustainable. In addition, the poor
receive only about 10 percent of the allocated amounts (2007). Lack of coherent social protection strategy to inform reform options.
2- Current SP system is fragmented. The various targeting methods generate inequities. Efficiency and impact of most programs are unknown.
3- Less than 25% of the labor force has access to pensions, health insurance, and other social security benefits.
Progress at CPS-PR: Moderate progress recorded. Indicators in original CPS were to have been established by the Targeting and Social Protection Strategy. This strategy has
since been delivered and dialogue on its recommendations is on-going. Indicators and milestones have thus recently been established to reflect the current status ofBank's
engagement - evaluation of progress on these indicators will be at the time of the CPS Completion Report.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to 
influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

A more coherent, equitable, and sustainable 
supply of social protection programs available A Targeting and Social 
to poor and vulnerable groups. 
Protection Strategy is endorsed 
by the government. 

Milestones prqgress 
The Targeting and Social Protection Strategy prepared by 
the Bank in coordination with an inter-ministerial technical 
committee, was endorsed by Government. Several 

Planned
9 Targeting and Social Protection
Strategy (ongoing).
9 TA on social security extension

reconmmiendations have been implemented (including 

(ongoing).

expansion of Tayssir, RAMED, social insurance schemes) 

9 PSIA.

A PSIA on the subsidy reform was carried out in 2010-2011 

9 Programmatic ESW/TA for SP

by the World Bank, and a communication campaign was 

launched by the Government in 2011. 

strategy implementation

envisaged.

m iOutcomes progress 

AcPmmAnisctompe 
tof informy Number of beneficiaries of Tayssir program has reached 
ceomuiaio. 
fsusd 
340,000 (2011/2012) 
nonsalrie wrkes, s 
er 
expanionsfoTaysir,RAMEistocalcisuranegscemes
menin an copltin RoalDecee o.11.2.14, 

rfhe e 

Milestones progress 
Bnak 
The household targeting system of RAMED (non- 

* Social Protection Project

envisaged.
Delivered/Underway
* Trowting andpomnandrteto

Targeting and Social Protection
Strategy. Published.
Dissemination strategy

prepared.
* Programmatic ESW/TA for SP

* Number of beneficiaries of Tayssir program. 

Baseline: 80,000 students (2008/09) 

Target: 400,000 (2012/2013) 

oe efficient 

ectie 

saretin 

M&E. 
* The RAMED targeting system has been 

performing household targeting 
system has been designed to 

contributory insurance scheme) has been designed, 
evaluated, and improved. 

implemented nationally and can be used by 

oterscil 
sisaceprgam.registry 

form the basis for a unified 

of beneficiaries. 

Outcomes progress 

Early 2012, the Government of Morocco has decided to 

strategy implementation

ongoing.

Ebpansion and diversification of social 

security coverage, 
9 Number of non-salaried workers registered 
with National Social Security Fund 

CNSS implements the 

extension of Social Security 
coverage to so me categories of 
Roy-alaDere no.krs 11.72.18 

scale up the pilot RAMED nationally. 
Milestones progress at(Cancelled).

TA on social security extension

Royal Decree no. 1. 11. 181 of November 22, 2011, 
n 
opeigRylDce 
o 1 214 
aedn 
dated July, 27, 1972, to extend social security coverage by 

the National Social Security Fund 

to licensed drivers, 

t 

GovI.Diernen 
oenet
PGoety, PEmpoyW 

o 

S

h

tn

Baseline: n.a. (201 1).Target : 200,000 (2013) 

approved in 2011. 

Outcomes p=ess: No data available yet.

38

Pillar 3: SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN A CHANGING CLIMATE

3.1 WATER MANAGEMENT

Government Objectives:
* Promote water demand management.
* Improve water resources quality protection.
* Adaptation to climate change impacts on water resources (see CC matrix).
* Improve water supply and sanitation (WSS) service coverage and efficiency.
* Pursue institutional reforms of the water sector.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Sub-optimal use of irrigation water, overexploitation of aquifers and weak enforcement of water abstraction regulation.
2- Inadequate sewerage, lack of wastewater treatment, environmental degradation and weak enforcement of water quality regulation.
3- Water resources management institutions not well prepared.
4- Inadequate access to WSS service in poor peri-urban and rural areas, need for enhanced cost recovery and investment capacity in WSS utility service and inefficient sector
organization and operator regulation.
5- Weak inter-ministerial coordination.
Progress at CPS-PR: Moderate progress recorded. The results matrix in this area has been fully revised to reflect better the Bank's program and align with the objectives of the 3
water/sanitation/irrigation investment projects that were approved by Board in June 2010 (after the CPS).

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Modernization of irrigation practices in agriculture and 
better control of groundwater abstraction. 
* Indicator: area equipped with drip irrigation systems. 
Baseline: 2008: 800 ha. 
Target: 2013: 15,000 ha. 

Start of works for the modemization of 
irrigation networks in ORMVAs of Tadla, 
Doukkala and Haouz. 

Milestones prozress 
Oum er Rbia (OER) Irrigated Agriculture 
modemization project is effective since 
September 2010. Works have started 

Design of control mechanisms of 
groundwater abstraction on the Tadla 
aquifer. 

On-going, the consultant recruited with PHRD 
Grant funds is working. Expected final delivery 
end of July 2012. 

Outcomes progres 
Ongoing works for off-farm drip irrigation 
networks to equip 7,700 ha are expected to be 
completed by December 2012. Works launched 
or being launched for the equipment in 
modernized irrigation of 13,500 ha, to be 
completed by end 2013. Installation of on-farm 
equipments expected to start in 2012. 

39

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Delivered/Underway
9 Oum er Rbia (OER)
Irrigated Agriculture
modemization
project.
9 OER sanitation
Project.
9 PHRD grant to the
OER basin agency.
ESW on CC impacts
on water resources
management.
Urban & rural water
supply system project.
WSS access support
project (OBA scale-
up).

Increased urban sewerage and wastewater treatment 
coverage. (in project areas) 
* Indicator 1: Number of households with access to
piped sanitation
Baseline: 2008: 10,000 
Baslie: 00: 
1,00 hd.for 
Target 2013: 40,000 hhd. 
* Indicator 2: Wastewater treatment capacity installed 

Baseline: Zero in 2008. 

Target: 200,000 eq inhabitants. 

Better knowledge of CC impacts on water resources. 
Indicator: Action Plan for adaptation to CC in the 
OER basin prepared 
Baseline: Zero. 
Target: One action plan. 

Increased access to and efficiency of WSS services (in 
project areas). 

* Indicator: 0 access to water service in rural and pe- 
urban areas covered by project.
Baseline: 2009: 000. 
Target: '70%. 

Better coordination between ministries involved in the 
water sector. 
* Indicator: Number of integrated water mobilization- 
irrigation investment plans prepared 
Baseline: 2009: 0.
Target 2013: 3(2011, 2012 and 2013).fucinl

Start of works under the OER sanitation 
Project 

Milestones progress 
Contacts under the on-going OER Sanitation 

. PMV DPL-1/water
component.

Completion of the OBA Urban Water Pilots 
service extension to poor pen-urban 
neighborhoods. 

The OBA Urban Water Pilots for service
extension to poor peni-urban neighborhoods
have reached the maximum number of
connections the Grant allowed subsidizing.

Outcomes prozress

The OBA Pilots for service extension to poor
pen-urban areas subsidized access of 9,036
households to piped sanitation. Further data on
indicators 1 and 2 not yet available
CC impacts studies and adaptation strategies Milestones progress
CC impact studies launched - GCM
f 
prepared for the OER basin. 
downscaling study already completed.
Hydrologic and water resources management
modeling studies achieved at 60d.

Preparation of a national program for service 
coverage extension in poor pe-urban areas, 

Peraiation of 
S prgamfrc thelvr 
through house connections (HC).unewy

Outcomes prozress

Study on the preparation of the CC Adaptation
Action Plan launched in April 2012.
Milestones progress
A National Program for service coverage
extension in poor peni-urban areas has been
developed.

Preparation of a program for the generalization
of water supply service delivery through HC is

ItActenvmn Plan 

prncediApred02

Outcomes prozress

Increased access in the Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation Project areas to 88,000 people by
March 2012, which represents 31a of the
population.

Milestones progress

Start of preparation of three Integratedad

Investment Plans.
Interministerial Commission of Water (CIE) 

functional.

Outcomes prozress: Data not available

40

3.2 LOW CARBON ENERGY POLICY AND ENERGY SECTOR RESTRUCTURING

Government Objectives:
* Enhance energy security and ensure availability of energy to all households and businesses at competitive prices, while protecting the environment and mitigating climate change.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- High import dependency and strong reliance on fossil fuels, resulting in a high carbon content of the energy mix.
2- Budgetary burden of price support schemes.
3- Finding the financial resources required by large investment needs of fast growing energy demand, especially to finance highly capital intensive low carbon technologies.
4- Avoiding a negative effect on the balance of trade because of the switch to more complex low carbon technologies.
Progress at CPS-PR: Moderate progress recorded. Results matrix has not been updated as it remains valid, even though there is weak progress on some milestones and indicators: this
is because their relevance is confirmed and the Bank's program continues to engage in these areas. The Bank's program continues the strong focus on TA in the energy sector although it
will explore ways of being more innovative on issues such as pricing reforms and energy efficiency. Because the Ouarzazate project's effectiveness is contingent on the PPP being in
place, this project is only expected to become effective toward the end of 2012. Thereafter, construction of the plant will start. Results for this project will thus be captured by the future

CPS.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to 
influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Reduction of energy intensity and increased 
penetration of renewable, to transition the 
Moroccan energy system to a low carbon path. 

Energy efficiency law enacted and 
plans by sector defined and under 
implementation. 

Milestones progress 
Energy efficiency law (47.09) enacted on 
09/29/2011 and published (Official Gazette 5989). 

Planned
9 ONE Support project
(transmission investment,

* Indicator: Energy intensity. 
Baseline (2007): 0.275 toe/$000 GDP 
Note: Baseline rebased to use IEA statistics: 
energy intensity was 0.275 toe per $000 GDP 
(GDP in constant 2000$). 

* Indicator: Share of renewable in TPES. 
Baseline (2007): 2.2% share of renewable in 
TPES. 
Note: Baseline rebased to use Ministry of 
Energy, Mines, Water & Environment statistics 

Renewable law enacted and 
implementing decrees adopted. 
Incentive scheme defined. 

Implementing decrees in preparation 

Renewable law (13.09) enacted on 02/11/2010 and 
published (Official Gazette 5822). Implementing 
decree n 2-10-578 (04/11/201) adopted. Other 

decrees in preparation 

Outcomes prqgress 

Energy intensity declined slightly until 2009 but 
increased in 2011, to reach the 2007 level again 

Share of renewable in TPES increased to 6.7% in 
2010 

Implementation of price reform, to reduce the
budgetary burden of price subsidies and ensure 

the financial viability of the energy operators. 

Consumer petroleum product prices 

Consumer petroleum product prices have not 

Milestones progress 

* Indicator: Share of explicit energy subsidies in 
GDP. 
Baseline: 3.5% in 2008. 

linked to international prices. 
Electricity tariff study completed, 
implementation plan agreed. 

changed since 2009 
Electricity tariff study not completed and no price 
adjustment implemented 

* Indicator: Profitability of ONE as measured by 

EBITDA. Baseline: 2 1 % in 2007. 

Energy regulator in place. 

_______________ 

Energy regulator planned for 2013 
leOutcomes proress 

41

company restructuring) -ongoing.
* Energy DPL.
9 GEF grant for Am Beni Mathar
integrated solar combined cycle
power plant;

9 Clean Technology Fund (CTF)

for low carbon investments
- Line of credit to FDE.
- Investment in CSP plant (regional
CTF CSP scale-up initiative).
TA on energy market reform.

9 IFC investment in wind
generation project

Delivered/Underwa

* Ouarzazate Solar Power Plant -
IBRD + CTF (FY12)

* ONE Support project-ongoing
supervision

9 PSW on energy market reform

and clean energy

Establishment of institutions and financial 
mechanisms to successfully implement energy 

sector reform (FDE, ESCOs, etc.). 

icat: 

B naslin: Zoerof 
2008. 

a 

reeo ss 

o 

-t 

tinstrog 

* Indicator: 
Baseline: Zero in 2008. 

of renewable

Development of a local manufacturing capability 
for renewable technologies and energy efficient 
equipment - a green stimuluspackage-therefore 

contributing to job creation, 

9 Indicator: Share of renewable PG equipment 
produced locally and exports of renewable 
equipment. 
Baseline: Zero. 

Share of energy subsidies in GDP has increased to 

5% in 2011 due to high world oil prices 

f TA on low carbon planning for

power sector

Profitability of ONE has deteriorated with EBITDA 
falling to 17 % in 2009 and 15% in 2011 (estimate). 

Merger ONE/ONEP under way. Should produce 

some cost reductions 

Fonds de D&veloppement de F'Energie Milestones progress 
(FDE) operational. 

Framework for ESCOs established 

Fonds de Dveloppement de Energie (FDE) 
operational. 

No ESCO framework established 

m ESMAP Energy Supply Strategy
* Maghreb Vulnerability
Assessment (power sector)

. PESW on Maghreb Energy

Market (regional market
integration, Euro-Med market in

*support of CSP)

9Maghreb Fossil Fuels (CCS)

MENA local manufacturing study
and workshop (delivered FY11)
Study on Morocco strategy and

roadmap for local manufacturing

and establishment of CIC (under

Volume of operations of FDE(.

2009: 167.5 MDH, 2010:160.9 MDH
2011: 324.4 MDH

Volume of EE operations through ESCOs:

negligible

Strategic study of Morocco's 
comparative advantage in
manufacturing of renewable equipment. Regional local manufacturing of renewable

Milestones progress

equipment study completed and disseminated
(Skhirat workshop). Follow-up study on road map

implementation and creation of Climate Innovation
Center (CIC) under way
Creation of IRESEN for R&D collaborative
projects in February 2011. Convention for the
creation of three renewable energy and energy
efficiency training institutes in Tangiers, Oujda and
Ouarzazate, signed
Outcomes progress
Share of renewable PG equipment produced locally

and exports of renewable equipment: negligible

MEF 

data collected for the Climate Change PER, 2011

aSource: 
t 

42

3.3 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT

Government Objectives:
* Provide legal and institutional basis for effective establishment of integrated municipal solid waste systems.
* Enhance the sustainability of the municipal solid waste sector through the introduction of financial mechanisms and incentives.
* Upgrade and operationalize the existing EIA system and improve the environmental and social performances of the solid waste sector.
Key Issues Targeted:
1- Lack of policy planning and coordination in the sector, and ineffective implementation of the national solid waste law.
2- Ad-hoc, limited and inefficient allocation of financial resources to the sector and modest cost effectiveness of the services.
3- Poor waste disposal practices with huge environmental and social negative impacts.
Progress at CPS-PR: Advanced progress recorded, mainly due to the successful completion of the DPL-2 for Solid Waste. Indicators and Milestones for the planned Solid Waste DPL-
3 will be specified at the time of DPL preparation and captured by the next CPS.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Effective inter-ministerial coordination of the National Solid 
Waste Program (PNDM) and strengthened regulatory framework A National Solid Waste 
through the enactment of executive regulations for SWM 
Commission involving key 
planning, norms and standards. 
ministries for coordination, 

* Indicator: Issue of decrees on SWM norms and standards, and 
regional planning. 
Baseline: 2008: None. 

planning, resources allocations 
and M&E of the PNDM is in 
place and operational. 

Regulations regarding sector 
planning, norms and standards are 

enacted. 

Milestones progress 

The National Commission of the PNDM (CN 
PNDM) was established and has been meeting 

regularly with key players on board. This 
Commission systematically reviews and 
approves annual action plans that detail planned 
funding allocations and implementation progress
of the PND, as well as recommends regulations 
on the sector.

Oucmspors 

toesSector 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Planned
9 Solid Waste DPL 1 (FY09)
9 Solid Waste DPL2 (FY11)
9 PPIAF/PSP Study

9 PSIA I (FY09)
9 PSIA 11 (under
preparation)

Delivered/Underw

Municipal Solid Waste

DPL2 (FY1)

Morocco has now almost completed the required 

9 Municipal Solid Waste

legislation in the municipal solid waste sector, 
building on the enactment of its first solid waste 
law. It had published the decree related to waste 
py 
classification; the decrees related to 
administrative procedures and technical 
specifications for sanitary landfills (Official 
Gazette dated January 7, 2010), and the decree 
related to procedures for the elaboration of 
provincial and prefectural MSW master plans
(Official Gazette dated July 22, 2010)

Sector DPL3 under
preparation
PSIA 
completed
Solid Waste Carbon
Finance program prepared
and appraised.
Negotiations of ERPA to
be held by Carbon Unit.

43

Better financial sustainability of SWM sector Allocation of 
financial resources are consistent with the sector policies and 
programs, 
* Indicator: Percentage of financial resources allocated to 
municipalities based on transparent eligibility criteria 
Baseline: 2008: 0% 

Improved cost effectiveness of private sector involvement in 
providing MSW services; and additional sources of revenues 
generated through Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). 

* Indicator: Average cost of MSM services provided by private 
operators. 

Baseline: 2008: 441 DH/ton.

Additional sources of revenues generated through Clean 

Development Mechanism (CDM). 

SIndicator: Number of CDM projects developed in solid waste 
sector. 
Baseline: 2008: Zero projects. 

* Indictor: Nmber 
ofCDM prjectsidvelopeeinisoldlwast

Disposal practices coMply with international social and 

environmental standards. 
* Indicator: Percentage of collected waste is being disposed of in 

sanitary landfill, 
Baseline: 2008: 

evenu 

1000 of resources granted to 
municipalities under PNDM are 
consistent with the new eligibility 
criteria.
Revised bidding documents and 

contact models developed and 
being used.

Number of CDM projects 

s 

nd 

miltoe 

D 
roppe 
as it is the same as the indicator 

Milestones progress
800 of resources granted to municipalities under
PNDM are consistent with the new eligibility
criteria.

Bidding documents and contacts models were

revised and being used.

Outcomesoress

PNDM are consistent with the new eligibility
criteria.

The average cost of MSW services provided by

private operators in 2011 is 3 80 DH/ton

Milestones and Indicator mrozress

A Solid Waste Carbon Fund program has been

developed and appraised by the Bank in
February 2012. The program targets 16 landfills
and is expected to cover a total volume of waste
of approximately 3.38 million tons per year and
representing more than 50 of municipal solid
waste collected in urban areas. The emission
reductions are estimated to an average of

838,000 tCO2e per year, amounting to '7.5
million tCO2e over nine years (2012-2020) . The
proposed Emission Reduction Purchasing

Agreement will enable the Bank as trustee of
CPF to purchase 2 million tCO2e.
Milestones progress

A national EIA commission and 3 Regional ETA committee is now established and
regional ETA commissions are 
fully operational throughout the Kingdom.

operational by 2011.
lo 

Outcomes rozress

Target (2011): 30%o of collected municipal wastes are disposed 

soal aeniierompntlyigwit 

30%o of collected waste is being disposed of in

of in sanitary landfills, 

smcil 

ad 

inmen 

sanitary landfill at the end of 2011.

This milestone is being dropped
as it is the same as the indicator

44

Government Objectives: Improve resilience to climate variability and change through the integration of adaptation actions across and within sectors.
Key Issues Targeted
1- Limited interagency coordination and policy coherence on CC adaptation;
2- Limited ability to design climate-resilient sector policies;
3-Few experiences on the ground of viable adaptation options

3.4 CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION

Progress at CPS-PR: Mixed progress recorded. Indicators for the planned Climate Change DPL will be specified at the time of DPL preparation and captured by the next CPS.

Outcomes the Bank Group expects to influence 

Milestones 

Progress to date 

Bank Group Program
Instruments/Status

Improved inter-agency coordination on climate change 
adaptation by mainstreaming climate adaptation in the national 
development planning process. 

Climate change impact 
analysis in key sectors 
completed and validated. 

Milestones pLqgress 
Climate change impact analysis completed for Agrculture, 
Fisheries, Transport, Water (only for Doukkala river 

Planned
9 ESW on CC issues m:
WRM, agriculture,

* Indicator: development of a national climate change 

strategy; ZeoOutcomes 

Baseline:The 

* Indicator: at least one adaptation action plan adopted in at 
least one of the key vulnerable sectors (agriculture, urban; 
transport or others) 

Brasnoro 
Baseline: Zero

Adaptation pilots initiated in selected areas. 

* Indicator: adaption pilots launched in at least 2 regions in 
the context of Plan Maroc Vert; 
Baseline: Zero 

basin),Coastal Cities 

prozress towards development of national climate 

chaze strate 
2 d National Communication to UNFCCC completed and 

submitted; 
White Paper on Climate Change currently under preparation; 
Integration of article on CC policy in Framework Law of 

Environment (currently under preparation) 

In agriculture, an action plan has been put in place by the

Agence pour le Developpemnent Agricole (ADA) for 
prioritizing the public financing of projects directed to small 
farmers (Pillar 11 Projects under the Plan Maroc Vert) that 
include climate change adaptation measures, 
Outcomes progress Three pilots have been launched in 2011 

in two regions (Chaouia - Ouardigha and Rabat - Sa 
Zemmour - Za&) concerning the implementation of 
adaptation measures in agriculture, as part of the GEF project 

"Integrating Climate Change in the implementation of the 
Plan Maroc Vert". A total of nine pilots are expected to be 
launched by 2014 under the same project, with an overall 
involvement of five regions. 

-

Development of tools and mechanisms to increase resilience 
and alertness. 

Risk management 
strategy completed, 

Milestones progress 
Risk management strategy completed. Pilot early warning 

* Indicator: Establishment of climate early warning systems 
(e.g. forecasting of spring cereal harvest based on winter 
precipitation data); 
Baseline: Zero

Including pilot early 
warning systems 
implemented. 

system to be launched soon
Outcomes proZress
Climate early warning system still being designed.

45

transport, coastal cities

adaptation, risk

management strategy,
climate migration and

displacement.
GEF- Capacity building
for Adaptation in WRM

and Agriculture.

Delivered/Underway
9 ESW on CC issues in:
WRM, agriculture,
transport, coastal cities
adaptation, climate

migration and
displacement.
- GEF- Capacity building

for Adaptation in WRM
and Agriculture.
9 Adaptation Climate
Change Coastal Cities

of North Africa
9 Risk Management AAA

Annex 2
Macro-Economic Developments

I. OVERVIEW

1. 
Despite the economic turmoil in the EU and globally, Morocco's economy proved resilient in
2011, registering moderate growth, stable inflation, and slightly decreased unemployment. Economic
growth improved from 3.7 percent in 2010 to 4.8 percent in 2011. The main drivers of growth were
domestic private consumption (up 6.5 percent) and total investment (up 4.5 percent). 
Inflation was
contained in 2011 (up 0.9 percent) primarily as a result of food and fuel subsidies. Unemployment
decreased slightly in 2011 (8.9 percent), due to the dynamism of the services and construction sectors.

2. 
Public finance worsened in 2011 due in large part to high subsidies; however financing the
deficit remains manageable. The budget deficit reached 6.8 percent of GDP, almost double the targeted
deficit set by the Budget Law of 2011 (3.5 percent of GDP). The high and increasing cost of the subsidy
system, along with the higher Government wage bill, accounts for the deterioration of the budget deficit.
Investment spending gained 6.1 percent, which is a positive sign in the sense that expenditure containment
is not achieved through investment restraints. Overall, the central government debt increased by only 2.6
percent of GDP in 2011, bringing it to about 52.9 percent of GDP.

3. 
The balance ofpayments ran a record current account deficit in 2011 (8 percent of GDP), which
resulted in declining foreign exchange reserves; the latter, however, remain at acceptable levels. Net
international reserves declined to US$19.7 billion, down from US$23 billion in December 2010.
Nonetheless, the reserves remain at a comfortable level of 5.1 months of imports of goods and services
versus 6.8 months the previous year. The major rating agencies have maintained Morocco's investment
grade.

4. 
Macroeconomic prospects in the medium term will be partially affected by the developments in
the global economy, particularly in Europe. However, Morocco is expected to benefit from the effect on
domestic demand of higher public investment and of the fiscal stimulus programs implemented over the
last few years. Thus, its economic growth will slow down in 2012 (3 percent) before progressively
reaching 5 percent in 2014. The budget deficit is expected to decrease only moderately to 5.1 percent of
GDP in 2012, reflecting the continued impact of the social measures taken in 2011 and the persistent
pressure of the subsidy system. The Government has reiterated its adherence to fiscal stability and
commitment to progressively decreasing the budget deficit to the target of 3 percent of GDP by 2015-16.
The external position is expected to remain sustainable over the medium term although the current account
deficit may stay high in 2012 (6.9 percent of GDP). 
In 2016 the deficit will likely edge downward
progressively to around 4.5 percent of GDP. In this context, external debt is expected to follow an inverted
U path reaching a maximum of 34.4 percent of GDP in 2014 before dropping to 33.8 percent by 2016,
while net foreign reserves will progressively improve from 5 months of imports in 2011 to around 5.6
months by 2016.

46

Output and Demand

II. 

REAL SECTOR

5. 
In 2011 the Moroccan economy proved resilient in 2011 despite the economic turmoil afflicting
its main trade partners in the EU who are facing their worst sovereign debt crisis to date (Figure 1). The
economy grew at an estimated 4.8 percent in 2011, recovering from the lower 3.7 percent registered in
2010. 
In the context of an economic slowdown in European countries, the main drivers of Moroccan
growth have been domestic private consumption and to a lesser extent investment. Private consumption
(up 6.5 percent) was in part supported by public social policies 20 implemented in early 2011 in response to
population demands for political and economic reforms and by improved access to consumption credit (up
10.5 percent). Investment demand rebounded by 4.5 percent after its decline the previous year (down 0.7
percent), thanks in part to vigorous public investment in public works and social housing, and in part to
higher than expected net FDIs, which increased by more than 51 percent. Net exports continue to be
disappointing, down by 5.2 percent in 2011 (following the 39 percent drop registered in 2010).

6. 
On the supply side, services continued to be the main engine of growth followed by agriculture
and phosphate products. Housing and services provided to businesses contributed the most to economic
growth. Services grew by 5 percent in 2011, recovering from its sluggish performance over the preceding
few years. General administration and social security services gained 7 percent, reflecting two initiatives:
a higher public employment rate geared to social sectors and to rural areas and efforts to improve the
processing of overdue insurance and pension cases. Education and health services continued their last
year's performance (up 5 percent) with Government efforts to enhance the quality of service delivery to
improve social indicators (low, but improving) compared to the region's standards. Thanks to favorable
weather conditions over the last 5 years and sector reforms encouraging hardy, high-productivity crops that
can withstand weather vagaries, the agricultural sector produced its best output ever, jumping 5.3 percent in
2011. Although the manufacturing sector still
suffers 
from 
low 
productivity 
and 
low 
diversification, 
phosphate 
product 
activities
performed well, thanks to high world demand and 
the elevated prices of fertilizers. Fertilizer and 
phosphoric acid activities gained 5 percent in 2011. 

Figure 1. Economic Growth Resilient in 2011 (percent)

30

40

20

-

Inflation 

10

0

* 

-10

-20

-5 

7. 
Inflation 
remained 
limited 
in 
2011,
primarily due to food and fuel subsidies that 
insulated domestic markets from high world prices. 
Inflation kept the same low rate as recorded a year
earlier (up 0.9 percent) (Figure 2). In addition, the 
easing of food prices for fresh produce in the second 
and fourth quarters following improved agricultural
supply, significantly helped to maintain food prices at a moderate level throughout the year (up 1.3
percent). Lower prices for services also played into the deceleration of non-food prices (up to 0.6 percent
compared to 0.8 percent the previous year). A decline in prices was seen in health services (0.3 percent vs.
0.9 percent the previous year). Transportation services and communication services registered negative
rates (-0.1 percent and -5.4 percent, respectively), due to a healthy competition in these sectors.

Source: Government of Morocco and staff estimate

-- - Non-AgricuIturIGDP 

Agriculture (rightaxis)

GDP 

-o

20 The Government decided to increase salaries of public employees by MAD 600 net per month and minimum wage by 15 percent in two steps (10
percent in July 2011 and 5 percent in January 2012). It also decided to raise the minimum pension by almost 67 percent to the benefit of some
700,000 retired employees and their families.

47

8. 

Subsidizing basic food and fuels remains a key Government policy to control inflation and
forestall social unrest. 
Inflation may have been much higher without the Government's decision to
insulate the domestic market from higher world prices of food and fuels through the costly subsidy system.
In the absence of a targeted, efficient, and well-
managed social protection system, subsidizing 
basic food and fuels constitutes, in the eyes of the 
Government, the best available option to contain 
ongoing protests for better living conditions and
more jobs. Although the costly universal subsidy 
system benefits primarily 
the middle-class 
(an
estimated 80 percent of the subsidies), the small
share accruing to the poor and vulnerable remains 
the most important available public transfer to 
improve their wellbeing. 

Figure 2. Inflation is Subdued Year Cumulated Averages
(percent)

A2.0 v

10.0

6.0

00

-4.0

Labor Market Development

----- Food -

- Non-Food 

CPI

Source: Government of Morocco and staff estimates

9. 
Unemployment declined slightly in 2011 
due to the dynamism of services and construction
sectors. Unemployment improved to 8.9 percent in 2011, down from 9.1 percent the previous year. This
was the lowest rate ever registered and can be attributed to the ability of the economy to create 105,000 net
new jobs: 
land transportation services offered 44,000 new jobs; retail trade offered another 40,000; the
construction sector, despite less than ideal conditions, provided 30,000 new jobs (down substantially from
the yearly average of 63,000 positions over the period 2008-2010). Job loss was registered in two sectors:
the industrial sector, faced with a sluggish external demand, particularly in regards to handicrafts, lost
31,000 positions, while the primary sector also lost 9,000 jobs.

Unemployment continues 
to be a predominantly 
urban phenomenon and affects mostly women and 

youth 

(Figure 3). Although declining, 

urban 

unemployment is still high (13.4 percent in 2011 vs.

13.7 percent in 2010), and actually increased for the 
most fragile population groups: women and youth. 

Female unemployment increased 1.4 percentage points 
to reach 21.2 percent. Youth (15 to 24 years of age) 
unemployment increased from 31.3 percent in 2010 to 
32.2 percent in 2011, and unemployment of university 

graduates 
increased 
1.5 
percentage 
points, 
a 
development that is particularly worrisome in light of 

the Arab Spring. 

Figure 3. High unemployment in urban, especially for
youth (percent)

25% 

20% 

1S% 

9 

c, 10%16

E

0% 

1999 

2001 

2003 

2005 

national left axis) 
-F urban youth (rightaxis) 

M 

.6.

40%

32%

24%

8%

0%

2007 

2009 
rban (left axis)
in urban educated (right axis)

2011

Source: Government of Morocco and staff estimates

10. 

Employment 
remains dominated by unskilled labor. 
The predominance of low-skilled
employment is explained by the structure of the economy and the low productivity of its sectoral
components. Although economic growth has been good over the last decade, it has not been accompanied
by a significant structural change in favor of activities with higher technological content. Agriculture,
construction, and public works and services-weighing in at about 80 percent in total value added- continue
to be the main drivers of economic growth. However these sectors are characterized by low employment
multipliers, especially with regards to skilled employment. For every 10 jobs created in such sectors, only 2
to 3 indirect jobs are generated. While the unskilled activities are labor-intensive, they contribute little,

48

directly and indirectly, to the creation of skilled employment. On average, 65 percent of total employment
created by these sectors is composed of an unskilled workforce and 30 percent for non paid family workers.

11. 
The main characteristics of the unemployed are as follows: four out of five are in urban areas;
among 15 to 29-year-olds, two out of three are jobless, and one in four graduates is a job seeker; one in two
unemployed is searching for a job for the first time, and nearly two in three have been unemployed for over
a year. Furthermore, 29.5 percent of unemployed lost their jobs because their employer lost his or her job,
and 16.8 percent are school drop-outs without a diploma.

III. 

PUBLIC FINANCE

12. 
Public finance worsened in 2011 and the budget posted its highest deficit since the mid-eighties
(Figure 4). The budget deficit stood at 6.8 percent of GDP 2 1, almost double the targeted deficit set by the

Budget Law of 2011 

(3.5 percent of GDP). The 

deterioration of the budget deficit stems from the

increasing cost of the subsidy system and, to a lesser 

extent, from the higher wage bill. The universal and

open subsidy system supporting prices of fuels and 

cereals continues to negatively impact the budget and 
constitutes a major risk to the sustainability of public
finance. Indeed, subsidy outlays almost doubled (US$6 
billion) with respect to those of 2010 and quadrupled 
compared to 2009 (Table 1). This exponential trend of 
subsidies since 2009 is worrisome, more so in view of a

global economic and political context characterized by 
high and 
increasing prices of basic commodities. 

However, although the costly and inefficient universal 

Figure 4. The high budget deficit in 2011 is driven by

1e 

10% 

0%

10 

r 

oGD

....

*

.

.

25%

5

0%

Budget defi 

Wages &

-

Total oeve-es (Right

Source: Moroccan government and staff estimate.

subsidy system benefits primarily the non-poor (the
population in the two lowest consumption deciles benefit from only 12.5 percent of subsidies), the small
share accruing to the poor and vulnerable remains to date the key social protection mechanism in place.
There are, nevertheless, concrete indications that the Government is now planning to reform the overall
system and design a new social protection model that is more cost effective and better targeted. The wage

bill also contributed to the increased budget deficit, jumping by 12.4 percent in 2011, reflecting the

revalorization of public salaries starting in May 2011 as part of a social package in response to the Arab

Spring. As a result of the revalorization, the wage bill increased to 10.9 percent of GDP, 0.6 percentage

points more than in the previous year, thus reversing the downward trend of wage-to-GDP ratio under way
since 2005.

US$ million 

Food 

Fuels 

Total Subsidies 

In % of GDP

Food 

Fuels 

Total Subsidies 
Source: Government ofgMorocco and StaffEstimates

Table 1. Increasing fuels and food subsidies
2007 
2008 

732 

1,263 

1,996 

1.0 

1.7 
2.7 

942 

3,116 

4,058 

1.1 

3.5 

4.6 

2009 

593 

988 

1,581 

0.7 

1.1 
1.8 

2010 

642 

2,589 

3,231 

0.7 

2.9 
3.6 

2011

865

5,171

6,036

0.9

5.1

6.0

21 Contrary to budget classification of the Government, this deficit rate is calculated without privatization proceeds, which are considered by the
IMF Guide on Public Finance as financing item rather than non-tax revenues. With privatization receipts, the deficit would be 6.2 percent of GDP.

49

13. 
The deficit would have been much higher without the measures taken by Government to improve
tax revenues and reduce non-priority recurrent expenditures. In an effort to bring the budget deficit to
reasonable levels, the Government intensified its effort to improve tax collection mainly through fighting
tax evasion and fraud, and by enforcing collection of overdue taxes. 
It also required that profitable
commercial SOEs scale up their contributions to the budget. This effort bore fruit as total revenues gained
7.2 percent, driven by good performance of business taxes (up 14.6 percent), VAT (up 10 percent), and
non-tax revenues (up 23 percent). In addition, the Government identified expenditure cuts that would not
endanger the good functioning of public services and asked most of the ministries to reduce related
spending by 10 percent. The outcome was positive, as non-wage recurrent expenditures dropped by 1.5
percent. This effort, however, was not enough to compensate for the rise of subsidies and wages.
Consequently, current expenditure growth reached a high of 19.4 percent. At the same time, investment
spending also gained 6.1 percent, a sign that expenditure containment is not achieved through reductions in
investment.

14. 
Financing the expected budget deficit is likely to have added only limited pressure to the
domestic money market thanks not only to substantial revenues from privatization operations, but also to
subsidy arrears. To ease the budgetary pressures, the Government resorted to ceding 20 percent of its
shares in a leading public bank -Banque Populaire- to privately-owned affiliated regional banks. The
operation generated the equivalent of US$690 million (MAD 5.3 billion). The Government also ran
payment arrears on subsidies due to fuel distributors amounting to the equivalent of 1.2 percent of GDP.
Overall, the central government debt increased by only 2.6 percent of GDP in 2011 to around 52.9 percent
of GDP, of which 12.1 percent of GDP denominated in hard currency, the same share as in 2010. This debt
level should remain manageable provided the Government takes measures to consolidate public finances,
notably through progressively reforming the subsidy system and controlling the evolution of the wage bill,
while scaling up its tax reform.

IV. MONEY AND BANKING

15. 
Monetary policy has been less restrictive in 2011 than in the previous year, despite a decline in
international reserves. Growth of M3 stood at 6.8 percent at end December 2011, as compared to 4.9
percent at the same period of 2010. Despite a less restrictive stance of the monetary policy, credit to the
economy slowed down slightly (10.3 percent), compared to the previous year (10.7 percent). With the
exception of slowing credit to equipment (5.1 percent in 2011 vs. 16.9 percent in 2010), all credits to other
activities progressed favorably, including that for working capital of firms, which gained an outstanding
19.9 percent in 2010 compared to 5.9 percent the previous year. Such a gain could reflect an anticipated
recovery of business. Housing credit was also up by 10.1 percent compared to 8.7 percent, and
consumption credit was also up to 10.5 percent compared to 8.1 percent. While nonperforming loans as a
share of total loans slightly increased (from 4.1 percent to 4.2 percent), the trend has been downward over
the last years.

16. 
The Central Bank of Morocco (BAM) kept its policy rate unchanged throughout the year. In
line with the objective of price stability and a balance of risks on the downside, BAM decided to keep the
policy rate unchanged at 3.25 percent, the same as that of the previous last year. BAM also decided to keep
this rate unchanged for the first Quarter of 2012. However, for the second quarter 2012 BAM decided to
lower the policy rate to 3 percent after predicting a slow-down in economic activity mostly due to a bad
agricultural year and a sluggish external demand.

17. 
The authorities are considering a possible move to a more formal inflation targeting system in
conjunction with a more flexible exchange rate, and the BAM has the necessary tools to manage such a
change. However, the timing of this reform should be considered with care as it will require certain

50

measures to ensure fiscal sustainability, especially with regards to reforming the subsidy system so as to
prevent a negative impact on financial stability.

V. 

EXTERNAL POSITION

18. 
The trade deficit deteriorated significantly in 2011. In terms of GDP, the trade deficit worsened
by 3.6 percentage points, from 19.5 percent in 2010 to 23.1 percent in 2011, reflecting a rise of nominal
imports by 20.1 percent while exports gained 16.3 percent only. This deterioration was explained in large
part by the soaring world prices of basic commodities, most importantly food (up 27.2 percent for imported
cereals) and fuels (up 31 percent for imported oil), but also by an increase in import volume (up 14 percent)
to meet the needs of domestic demand (a demand which continues unabated). The performance of
exporting sectors continues to be lackluster, with little diversification and little competitiveness from within
the Moroccan economy. This is why Moroccan exports have not been able to fully benefit from the many
FTAs signed with the EU, the USA, and Turkey, among others, over the last decade.

19. 
The balance of payments ran a record current account deficit in 2011, which resulted in
declining, though acceptable, foreign exchange reserves. The current account deficit ran a record-high
ratio to GDP of 8.0 percent, compared to 4.5 percent in 2010. The current account deficit would have been
even higher without the positive evolution of workers' remittances (up 7.6 percent) and of tourism receipts
(up 4.8 percent), an excellent performance in an unfavorable global context. On the financing side, gross
FDIs receded, but net FDIs increased by 122 percent to reach US$2.3 billion compared to US$0.985 billion
the previous year. Overall this indicates improved confidence 
in the Moroccan economy as FDI
disinvestments were low in 2011 (US$0.91 billion) compared to those of the previous year (US$3.2
billion). Net international reserves also declined by US$3.4 billion by end 2011. At US$19.7 billion
(down from US$23 billion in December 2010), they remain at a comfortable level of 5.1 months of imports
of goods and services versus 6.8 months the previous year.

20. 
In 2011, the dirham appreciated against the dollar and slightly depreciated against the euro.
After two years of depreciation against the dollar (a cumulated 8.7 percent), the local currency turned
around and appreciated by 3.9 percent. On the other hand, it lost 1 percent of its value against the euro.
The appreciation of the dirham vis-d-vis the dollar may also have contributed to the poor performance of
Morocco's exports to its main markets in the European Union, as it may have led to an additional loss of
competitiveness vis-a-vis countries whose currencies are pegged to the dollar rather than the euro.
Although the current exchange rate regime has contributed to macroeconomic stability, the recent trends in
the current account balance, given the rigidities of the economy, would suggest that it might be
undermining international competitiveness. Recent IMF estimates are not conclusive on the subject as the
analysis of the deviation from the equilibrium exchange rate provides diverging results depending on the
methodology implemented. Additional analyses will be needed to fully appreciate the impact of the current
exchange rate on the external competitiveness of the Moroccan economy.

21. 
Despite the country's difficult external environment and internal social tensions requiring
political change, Morocco retained its investment rating. The major rating agencies responded positively
to Morocco's relatively good macroeconomic performance, its solid efforts to address main economic
challenges, and its demonstrated commitment to continue reform. The confirmation of the rating should
encourage international investors to scale up their investments in Morocco. The rating should also help
Morocco access international financing on favorable conditions.

22. 
Medium 
term macroeconomic prospects of Morocco will be partially affected by 
the
developments in the global economy and particularly in Europe - Morocco's main trade partner. The

VI. 

OUTLOOK

51

anticipated stagnation of economic activities in Europe in 2012 and its slow recovery thereafter, will
negatively impact Moroccan exports and thus growth. In addition, forecasted weather conditions (drought)
for 2012 indicate that growth may be adversely affected by an expected decline of agricultural output
which normally accounts on average for about 15 percent of GDP. To partially compensate for a sluggish
external demand, Morocco will lean on benefits from the effect on domestic demand of higher public
investment envisaged in the Budget Law of 2012 and on the fiscal stimulus programs implemented over the
last few years, including wage revalorization that will have their full effect in 2012. It is hoped that, under
these conditions, the growth rate will slow to about 3.0 percent in 2012, before progressively improving to
around 5.5 percent in 2015.

23. 
Should the underlying sources of growth be slow to materialize, growth forecasts would have to
be adjusted downward. A potential deterioration, particularly in Europe, would negatively impact the
macro-economic outlook through reduced prospects on exports, including tourism, as well as on workers'
remittances and FDI flows. Similarly and/or simultaneously, sustained high commodity prices or a
deterioration of the regional context and prolonged global financial uncertainties would have an adverse
impact on Morocco's prospects as well. Finally, there is a potential risk that even pre-crisis growth levels
might not be sustainable over the medium term if internal demand remains the main driver of growth.

24. 

The budget deficit is expected to decrease to 5.1 percent of GDP in 2012, but to date it remains
relatively high, reflecting the continued impact of the social measures taken in 2011 and the persistent
pressure of the subsidy system. The new draft Budget law presented to Parliament in March 2012
reaffirms the 2011 commitment to implement a series of social measures to ease social pressures.
However, in line with the new Constitutional requirement, the Government has also reiterated its adherence
to fiscal stability and to a progressively decreased budget deficit, aiming for a medium term target of 3
percent of GDP by 2015-16 through the implementation of a set of critical reforms. The key measures
include progressively reforming the universal subsidy system, implementing civil service reform including
the realization of a new remuneration system, and further advancing the fiscal reform agenda. Under these
conditions the budget deficit would progressively decline and meet the medium term objective.

25. 
Declining deficits over the medium term would be financed primarily through the domestic
market, as well as from steady drawings on external sources. Domestic financing would remain the main
source of public financing, although external financing would improve its contribution. 
In this context,
central government debt will increase to 54.7 percent of GDP in 2012 and to 54.9 percent of GDP in 2013
before shifting to a downward trend to 52.5 percent of GDP by 2016 (Table 2).

Table 2. Central Government Debt Stock, in percent of GDP
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 

Foreign 
Domestic 

Total 

9.9% 
37.4% 
47.3% 

10.7% 
36.4% 
47.1% 

12.1% 
38.2% 
50.3% 

12.1% 
40.9% 
52.9% 

12.3% 
42.3% 
54.7% 

12.5% 
42.4% 
54.9% 

12.5% 
41.9% 
54.4% 

2015 

12.4% 
41.2% 
53.7% 

2016

12.3%
40.3%
52.5%

26. 
The external position is expected to remain sustainable over the medium term provided that key
critical reforms currently being implemented take hold. The current account deficit is expected to
improve in 2012 to 6.9 percent of GDP and progressively edge downward to around 4.5 percent of GDP in
2016. In this context, the external debt is expected to follow an inverted U path reaching a maximum at
34.4 percent of GDP in 2014 from 28 percent of GDP in 2010 before easing to 33.8 percent by 2016, while
net foreign reserves improve progressively from 5 months of imports in 2011 to around 5.6 months by
2016.

27. 
In sum, on the assumption that key fiscal and structural reforms described above are
implemented 
in a timely fashion, Morocco's macroeconomic framework remains adequate and

52

sustainable in the medium term. The effects of global uncertainty on the Moroccan economy have been
muted by good economic fundamentals resulting from sound macroeconomic policies carried out over the
last years and by the Government's current response which is supporting investors' confidence and
domestic demand. If the Government has smaller margins for maneuver today (as compared to the 2008
crisis), its commitment to increase and expand reform efforts nevertheless supports positive prospects for
investment, growth, macroeconomic development, and employment.

53

Annex 3
CPS Lending Program

Annex 3: CPS LENDING PROGRAM

CPS PLAN (December 2009) 

IBRD $IV 

CPS Progress Report (June 2012) 

IBRD $I

FY10

Total 
FY11

Total 

FY12 

Total 

FY13

Sustainable Access to Finance DPL2 

Education Sector DPL 
Public Admin Reform DPL- IV 
Rural Roads Additional Financing 
Urban and Rural Water 
Oum Er Rbia Irrigated Agriculture 
Oum Er Rbia Sanitation 

10C Delivered (amount increased) 

60 Delivered 
10C Delivered 
80 Delivered (amount increased) 
15C Delivered (amount increased) 
70 Delivered 
40 Delivered (amount increased) 
60C Total 

Urban Transport Sector DPL 
Support to Plan Maroc Vert DPL 
Solid Waste Sector DPL 
National Initiative Human Dev. II 
Energy Sector DPL 
Energy Development Fund 
Health Sector DPL 

GEF Integrating Climate Change in PMV 

Delivered 
Delivered 
Delivered 
Planned for FY12
Not pursued by GOM
Not pursued by GOM
Not pursued by GOM
600 Total 
4.35 Delivered 

PROGRAM TO BE DEFINED 
AT MID TERM CPS REVIEW 

PROGRAM TO BE DEFINED 
AT MID TERM CPS REVIEW 

Delivered:
Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power 
Scheduled for delivery:
First Skills and Employment DPL 
Judicial Performance Enhancement 
National Initiative for Human Development II 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) Dev. 
600 Total 

Other delivered

Ouarzazate Clean technology Fund (CTF) 
Other not yet delivered
IGEF Integrated Coastal Zone Management 

Competitiveness DPL1
Governance and Accountability DPL
Urban Transport Sector DPL2
Financial Sector DPL2
Plan Maroc Vert DPL2
Solid Waste Sector DPL3
Education Sector DPL2
Climate Change DPL
Road Asset Management

20C

60
10C
81.5
175
70
43
729.5

136.
205
138.E

480.3
4.35

20C

10C
16
30C
10C
716

97

5.18

Total 

600

GEF Social and Integrated Agriculture 

6.3

54

Annex 4
CPS AAA Program

Highlights of the Bank's AAA Program - Cutting Edge Knowledge Informing Reforms

Targeting and Social Protection Strategy Note. This Note responded to the Government's request as part of the
preparation for the food and fuel price subsidies reform. It followed up on a high level workshop (April 2008) and on
study tours in Mexico, Chile and Indonesia (July 2008), organized by the Bank for inter-ministerial Moroccan
representatives. Delegations concluded on the need to review existing social assistance and poverty programs in
Morocco, and identify a package of programs for those who would be affected by the reform, including CCTs
programs. The ESW is now completed, approved by the government, published, and is being disseminated. A key
recommendation is to reform subsidies which would free up the resources needed to scale up better targeted and more
cost/efficient social protection programs. More specifically, the study proposes 14 priority actions under the following
four strategic goals (i) : Improve targeting in order to use resources more effectively; (ii) Extend coverage of risks and
at-risk social groups; (iii) Clarify roles and responsibilities and strengthen institutional capacity; (iv) develop M&E
systems, analyze the political economy and communicate on the reform.

Expanding Youth Opportunities and Participation. This is an innovative ESW - launched in 2010 prior to the
Arab Spring - analyzing the aspirations of young Moroccans aged 15 to 29 years, their economic and social
circumstances, as well as the institutional factors that impede their economic and social inclusion. It utilized a new
instrument, the Morocco Household and Youth Survey, which allowed for age and gender-disaggregated analysis,
combining qualitative and quantitative perspectives on youth poverty and social exclusion. The survey thus gathered
information on understudied issues related to youth, such as labor force participation and intermediation, career
choices and perceived employment opportunities, use of free time, and use of youth-oriented services.

Impact Evaluation of Education Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) Pilot. CCTs are recognized to be a powerful
tool in reducing drop-outs in education. A pilot CCT program in education - Tayssir - was implemented by Morocco
in order to learn how best to design the program before it could be scaled up at the national level. The Bank partnered
with the MIT Poverty Action Lab to evaluate the impact of this CCT pilot. The analysis covered (i) the impact of
CCTs on school enrolment, attendance and academic achievement, (ii) whether the transfers needed to be conditional
on active school participation and (iii) how the effectiveness of the cash transfer varies depending on whether the
transfer is given to the mother or the father. The five poorest regions of Morocco were chosen and 320 schools from
those regions participated. The results showed that the Tayssir program reduced drop-out rates significantly by 57%
for those schools targeted. Re-insertion rates of kids who had previously dropped out increased by 37%. These rates
were even better when the CCT was given to the mothers. Drop-out rates were 30% lower where the mother had
received the transfer compared to schools where the father had received it, and were 15% higher for re-insertion. The
evaluation also studied learning outcomes and concluded that children in Tayssir communities performed better on the
standard arithmetic tests than children in communities without Tayssir. The results of the Bank's work are feeding
into the Government's scale-up of this program at national level.

Statistical Work. In February 2011, the Bank and the Government statistical agency - HCP - signed an agreement
for cooperation with the objective to work jointly on research activities aimed at informing policy about strategic areas
of policy reforms. This agreement is the first of its kind signed by the HCP and represents a real step forward in data
access and dissemination. The research activities were agreed as priorities for the Government and the World Bank's
program and cover poverty analysis, employment and labor market analysis, simulation of industrial and trade
policies, and equity analysis of access to public services. One important result is the work on poverty that is
estimating for the first time the poverty rates in Morocco for the period 2001-2009, including poverty rates on a
quarterly basis. Such quarterly monitoring will make it possible to observe the short-term effects of economic shocks
on household welfare. The labor market work is allowing for in-depth analysis of labor mobility and the work on
equity of access to public services has started with a focus on health. The Bank's work has also provided TA to the
HCP for preparation of nutritional maps and TA to the National Observatory for Human Development.

Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) for Health. The Moroccan Ministry of Health requested the Bank to
carry out a Public Tracking Expenditure Survey (PETS) and Quantitative Service Delivery Survey (QSDS) in the

55

health sector. The ultimate goal of the PETS/QSDS is to improve service delivery and the impact and equity of public
expenditure, acting as a useful complement of the health sector Public Expenditure Review. The PETS/QSDS data are
expected to add significantly to our understanding of the issues and problems that arise in the front line delivery of
public health services to poor people in Morocco as well as in the MENA region.

Risk Management. The Bank is helping Morocco manage its exposure to risks that may have potential dramatic
impact on its budget as well as may severely affect local community and social stability. These risks are commodity
price volatility, natural disaster risk and agricultural sector risk. The work covers a three-phase approach: (i)
preliminary identification and assessment of risks and their impact on the economy and assets, (ii) development of a
comprehensive risk management strategy and its related action plans, and (iii) execution of the strategy and the action
plans. This initiative looks at several types of risks simultaneously in order to provide a comprehensive analysis of
risk management. There is potentially tremendous value for the Bank to replicate this work in other countries.
Switzerland and GFDRR have been providing critical financing to this work.

ICT. The Bank's TA to the ICT sector has helped launch several important activities in support of eGovernment
surveys, M&E, cooperation and information sharing across Ministries and agencies, and the establishment of the
Ministry of Industry, Trade & New Technologies (MICNT) observatory, a joint public-private partnership. The Bank
is supporting the implementation of the national ICT strategy - Maroc Numerique - as well as providing TA for better
governance of the sector, strengthening project management, and piloting shared services, especially those that have
an important citizen interaction (e.g. digitization of the civil service registry). The TA is advising on ICT for social
accountability, using citizens and beneficiaries to help empower citizens, monitor projects and provide feedback.

56

Annex 4
CPS AAA Program

Continued

1.1 

BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT

Reforming the Business Environment (FY10-12)
Maghreb Cross Border Constraints (investment/trade) (FY09-12)
Trade Capacity Building (FY11)
Competitiveness TA (FY12)
EU-Trade and Integration (FY12-13)
E-Govt and Broadband (FY10-11)
ICTStrategy Implementation (FY12)

1.2 

FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM

FIRST: Strengthening Crisis Preparedness Policies and Processes (FY11)
FIRST: Strategy and Instruments to Establish Reliable Interest Rate
Benchmarks (FY12-13)
FIRST: Introduction of Covered Bonds (FY11-12)
Bank Governance Review (FY10-11)

1.3 

SKILLS AND EMPLOYMENT
EmploymentTA (FY12-14)

E-Govt and Broadband (FY10-11)

2.1 

PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT

Public Administration Reform (FY10)
Justice Public Expenditure Review (FY12)
E-Govt and Broadband (FY10-11)

Justice TA (FY10-11)

Country Governance and Anti-Corruption (FYO9-10)
Use of Country System Initiative Pilot (FYO9-11)
Governance and Territoriality (FY11)
ICTStrategy Implementation (FY12)

2.2 

QUALITY AND ACCESS IN EDUCATION

SIEF Impact Evaluation Primary School (FYO8-10)
Impact Evaluation E-Monitoring CCT (FYO9-10)
Education Public Expenditure Review (FY12-13)

2.3 

HEALTH SECTOR REFORM

Health Public Expenditure Review (FYO9-12)

2.4 

VULNERABILITY AND SOCIAL EXCLUSION

Regional Dev. for Disadvantaged Areas (FYO8-10)
Breaking Barriers to Youth Inclusion (FYO8-11)
Governance of Service Delivery to Citizens (FY11-12)

57

Annex 4
CPS AAA Program
Continued

2.5 

TRANSPORT

Transport and Energy Efficiency (FYO8-10)
Transport TA (FYO9-11)
Support to Port Regulation (FYl-11)

2.6 

AGRICULTURAL SECTOR REFORM

Agricultural Sector Review Update (FYO9-10)
Adaptation to Climate Change in Agriculture (FYO8-10)
GFDRR TA Risk Prevention and Management (FYO9-13)
Community-Based Disaster Risk Management (FY12-13)

2.7 

SOCIAL PROTECTION

Targeting and Social Protection Strategy (FYO9-10)
Pension Reform (FYO9-11)

Poverty PESW (FY09-11)

Growth, Employment and Poverty PESW (FY11-14)
Compensation Reform (FY12-13)

3.1 

WATER MANAGEMENT

Climate Impact on Water Resources (FY11-12)

3.2 

LOW CARBON ENERGYPOLICY AND ENERGY SECTOR RESTRUCTURING

ESMAP Energy Supply Strategy (FY09-10)
Maghreb Vulnerability Assessment (power sector) (FY09-10)
Clean Energy (FYO9-11)
Maghreb Energy Market Study (FY08-11)
Maghreb Fossil Fuels (FY11-13)

3.3 

SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT

Urban Development Strategy (FY10)

3.4 

CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION

Adaptation Climate Change Coastal Cities of North Africa (FY09-12)
Climate Change PESW (FY10-14)

58

Annex 5
Trust Fund Management

1. 
The Bank's program makes use of Trust Fund (TF) financing, mainly in support of
analytical work and for GEF projects. The TF program has helped the Bank deliver a broader
knowledge program, including in some cutting-edge areas, and to pilot innovative approaches. This
knowledge then feeds into the design of Bank projects and programs. The initial stages of the CPS had
witnessed a proliferation of trust funds - particularly small ones -
in the program but this is now being
reined in and trust funds are being pursued only where they are specifically linked to priority areas of the
Bank's engagement.

2. 
The TF program is organized according to CPS pillars. This alignment facilitates
assessment of results. The total TF portfolio amounts to $169.2 million in ten sectors (public sector
management, social protection, transport, health, education, human development, climate change,
agriculture, water, energy and inclusion). Of this, the CTF-financed project for the Ouarzazate
Concentrated Solar Power Plan Project - at $97 million -
is the largest project. Other sizeable activities
in the TF portfolio in terms of financing include the GEF projects, GPOBA pilots for water supply and
sanitation (total of $7 million), a JSDF grant for capacity building to improve schooling for the poor ($2.2
million) and a new PHRD grant of $2.85 million for Accessibility of Persons with Limited Mobility.
The rest of the portfolio is aimed at capacity building and knowledge sharing.

3. 
TF supported activities provide valuable analytical underpinnings for IBRD's DPL
programs. Areas that benefit include public sector management, the energy sector, and the water sector.
The education sector is making innovative use of TFs by supporting the testing of Conditional Cash
Transfer (CCT) pilots for rural schools which aim to improve the transparency, accountability and
effectiveness of service delivery in the education sector. Related analytical work influences education
policy reforms supported through the Education DPL. The lessons learned from the CCT pilot and its
evaluation are being used by the broader development community in Morocco. TFs on climate change, a
priority CPS area, have expanded. They help develop a better understanding among Moroccan decision
makers and development partners of the impacts of CC, the policy measures or other actions.

GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY & CLEAN TECHNOLOGY FUND

Transport

Water

5M-GEF Southern Mediterranean Marine Highway (P127569) 

8 000 000 RE

Regional Coordination on Improved Water Resources 
TF010251 Management and Capacity Building (with NASA)
Agriculture

GEF Social and Integrated Agriculture 
TF099539 
Integrating Climate Change in the Implementation of the PMV 
Environment
MENA- Desert Ecosystems and Livelihoods Program (DELP)
Knowledge Sharing and Coordination (ASIMA)

Energy
TF058314 GEF FSP - Integrated Solar Combined Cycle 
Energy
TF010916 Ouarzazate I Concentrated Solar Power Plan Project - CTF 
Environment
I Integrated Coastal Zone Management # Mediterranean Coast pr. 

TOTAL 

1 050 000 RE

6 440 000 RE
4 345 454 RE

43 200 000 RE

97 000 000 RE

5 180 000 RE
165,215,451

59

CPS 

Pillars 

TF Number Trust Fund 

us$

BE!

RE

Public sector management
TF094459 
ID 
- Modernization of Public Procurement 11 
TF094712 
GPF - Improv. Governance in social services delivery impact 
TF096444 
National Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Strategy 
TF097271 
ID 
- Institutionalizing a Reform Process for the Business Envt. 
TF097557 
Introduction of Covered Bonds 
TF011405 
Strengthening Trade and Competitiveness 
TF011436 
Strategy for Reliable Interest Rate Benchmarks 
TF096171 
Capacity Bldg in ex-ante trade policy/export trade policy assess. 
TF097392 
Strengthen Crisis Preparedness Policies and Processes 
TF098509 
Support the law on Catastrophe Insurance 
TF098895 
PPIAF-Morocco PPP Unit Support 
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis of Climate Policy 
STF099362 
National Initiative for Human Development
TF090194 
IDF - Imrovin Local Governance Thr M&E 

S Agriculture

TF094209 

nd - Institutional Capacity Bldg for Cooperative 

Health

TF095651 

Education

Avian Influenza Preparedness Proect 

TF093691 
E-Monitoring of Conditional Cash Transfer Rural prog. 
TF093303 
CCT - Impact Evaluation 
TF093996 
JSDF - Cap. Bld./Mgmt. to Improve Schooling for Poor 
Social Protection
TF090592 
ITFESSD - Promoting Effective Local Gov. in M2NA (Mor) 
Water
TFO10093 
TF096698 
TF096701 

GPOBA (W3 SPN): Morocco Urban Water 
GPOBA (W2): Dissemination of Morocco OBA 
GPOBA (W 
I): 
Scale Up Urban Water& Sanitation 
GPOBA - Urban WS&S Access Pilots 
GPOBA - Urban WS&S Access Pilots 
GPOBA (W I) Morocco Rural Water OBA Schemes 

> 

9 

C 

W 

W 

> 

-

< 
.

307700 
BE
750000 
BE
125000 
BE
348750 RE
180870 
BE
130000 
BE
422499 
BE
80000 
BE
160000 
BE
250000 
BE
250000 
BE
80 000 BE

229 000 RE

382500 RE

888 490 RE

386 000 BE
350000 BE
2 179410 RE

375000 BE

80000 
70 000 
170000 

BE
BE
BE

2 100 000 RE
4900 000 RE
280 000 BE

60 000 BE
80000 
BE
1 000 000 RE

18000 BE

850 000 RE

200 000 BE
200 000 BE
450 000
150 000 BE
198 000 BE
400 000 BE
200 000 BE
200 000 RE

TF057598 
TF057599 
TF099166 

TF099582 
TF011520 
TF092827 
Agriculture
TF095204 
Transport
TF010735 
Inclusion
TF057391 
TF057358 
TF093328 
TF093136 
TF093062 
TF092688 
TF098528 
TF097663 
Water
TF092827 
Energy
TF093067 
TF093443 
TF092736 
TF098543 

TOTAL 

PPIAF: Documentary Film on OBA Pilots 
Political Economy Analysis of the Irrigation Sector Reform 
Oum Er Bia Irrigated Agriculture 

Rural land titling and female ownership 

MA-Promoting Accessibility of Persons with Limited Mobility 

TFESSD - Breaking Barriers to Youth Inclusion 
TFSSD - Adaptation to Climate Change in Ag (Mor) 
TFESSD - Climate Change Ecosystems Assessment (Mor) 
NTFPSI - Adaptation Climate Change Coastal Cities of NA(MI/T) 
TFESSD - Adaptation to Climate Change Coastal Cities Morocco 
TFESSD - Managing social change in CC in MNA (M/T) 
Increasing resilience to climate shocks through risk management 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management # Mediterranean Coast 

Capacity bldg. adapt/CC impacts on water management in Oum Er Rbia 

1 000 000 RE

ESMAP - Transport and Energy Efficiency 
ESMAP - Energy Supply Strategy 
ESMAP - Maghreb Energy Market 
Preparation of the Municipal Solid Waste Carbon Finance Project 

96 900 RE
185000 BE
50 000 RE
520 000 RE

169,200,000

60

Annex 6
Outreach Events - Civil Society Engagement

1. 
In an effort to extend the World Bank communication and exchange with the external public and
with active CSOs in Morocco working in the areas of interest of the World Bank, the Bank's team has
organized, during the course of the CPS implementation, a series of events and consultations to involve
CSOs in a global reflection over Morocco's latest political and social events and to survey their
development visions and expectations.

2. 
In order to make the CPS widely available, copies were distributed in January, 2011, to
universities, libraries, foundations, donors, associations and research institutes. Every two months the
World Bank Maghreb Newsletter, which provides the latest information on all of the region's programs,
is sent to an extensive list that includes the Bank's partners, the media, Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs), and academics. 
Face-to-face encounters have also played an important role during CPS
implementation, as a means to develop new partnerships, gain valuable input on the design of appropriate
strategies and gauge the effect of current programs.

3. 
The World Bank Morocco Country Office stays 
in regular contact with civil society
organizations, journalists and members of the business community through informal dinners and brown
bag lunches. A team is currently making physical visits to the locations of Bank programs, to gather first-
hand testimony on their progress and impact through direct engagement with beneficiaries. World Bank
MENA has launched a blog and a Facebook page that carries reports, along with opinion pieces, from
both staff and external authors, in French, Arabic and English. It also solicits comments and feedback in
the three languages, in an effort to provide more opportunities to engage with the Bank, and establish a
virtual proximity with important social actors whose voice and opinions have not always been clearly
heard.

4. 
The World Bank has taken an important step towards translating its outreach into support for one
of the defining processes to emerge from the Arab Spring, the rebuilding of the social contract. From
March 12 to 15, 2012, in Rabat, the Bank drew on its power as a convening authority, in partnership with
CARE International, to bring together civil society groups for the launch of the Arab World Affiliated
Networks for Social Accountability (ANSA Arab World.) ANSA Arab World will be developed as a
regional network promoting active citizen participation in policy formulation, implementation and the
monitoring of how public resources are spent. Empowering civil society as a source of public
accountability has long been a goal of the Bank, but with the inauguration of ANSA Arab World this
effort moves to a new level. At the global level in the Bank, an initiative is underway to formalize and
consolidate the growing relationship with civil society through the Global Partnership for Enhanced
Social Accountability, which is evaluating the need for a dedicated division. As part of the evaluation, an
event was organized on February, 2012, in which Moroccan civil society groups offered their opinions on
how such a dedicated organization might be structured, and what support it might offer.

5. 
In parallel with these outreach and dissemination activities, there has also been a long history of
consultations. Morocco's commitment to reforms, together with its active civil society, has made it a
sough after interlocutor during the drafting of World Bank reports. In 2009, through a consultation
organized in Rabat, Morocco provided valuable input for that year's World Development Report (WDR)
based on its experience with, and policies to cope with, the report's central theme of the economic
relations between growing and lagging regions. An event was organized in June, 2011, to discuss the
current World Development Report and a MENA companion report, which focuses on gender, and
extensive consultations for a report on Moroccan youth were held in May of the same year, in Rabat and
Casablanca, to which a variety of youth organizations and young professionals were invited to share their
views. The WDR has already been shared; the other reports will be widely distributed and promoted once

61

published, and serve as platforms for future engagement and consultations with key populations on
critical issues.

6. 
Since 2010, there have been a series of official visits, and both formal and informal encounters.
The World Bank President visited Morocco in May of 2011, as part of a listening tour of the region
following the political upheavals earlier in the year, with the specific goal of hearing from civil society
groups about their vision for the future. In February, 2011, a consultation was organized in Fez between
World Bank Executive Directors and local authorities, academics, and representatives from cultural and
social associations, to exchange views on the development challenges facing Morocco.

CSOs OUTREACH EVENTS

Consultations

7. 

Report/Studies consultations (Previous and current FY):

* May 2 6 th/ 2 7 th, 2011 - Consultation on Morocco youth ESW. Youth organizations working in
social, political, educational and revenue generating activities as well as young professionals
associations were invited in two separate consultations in Rabat and Casablanca. The objective
was to collect their opinions and youth demands in terms of freedoms, work, education and
support to complete the report.

* 

* 

June 15th , 2011: Consultation on gender issues for the next WDR issue. The consultation was
divided 
into two groups: government 
representatives and CSO representatives. On 
the
consultation with Civil society, as 
the report covers various arrays of gender 
issues,
representatives of Unions, associations for the defense of women rights, gender specialists,
academics and economists were invited to bring their vision and thoughts on Morocco's main
challenges in terms of gender equality and women access to the job market, health infrastructures
and strategic positions (political, administrative and private). T

June 27 th, 2011: Consultation on the project to improve service providing in Moroccan
tribunals. In this consultation, representatives from professional unions and associations, as well
as 
law academics and representatives 
from Foundations, governance and anti-corruption
organizations were invited. The guests brought both a technical/legal vision on the justice sector
main issues and more concrete experiences on the difficulties regular citizens find in accessing
legal information and dealing with the judicial system in Morocco.

* September 7 th, 2011: Civil society consultation on the WB Support to the second phase of
INDH. The consultation outcomes have been compiled, cleared by the TTL and sent out to the
participating and invited CSOs for potential comments.

* February 2nd, 2012: further to an informal consultation in November 2011, an enlarged CSO
consultation has been organized to gather civil society recommendations on the governance
structure and mechanisms of the Global Partnership for Enhanced Social Accountability
Initiative (GPESA). A follow-up on this consultation is still pending.

* March 12 th-15 th: Official launch of the ANSA-AW initiative (Affiliated network for Social
accountability in the Arab World) in Rabat. Various Moroccan CSOs were invited, along with
other Arab counterparts to share their views on the structure and mission of this new pan-Arab
network for social accountability.

8. 

Report disseminations:

62

* October 12th, 2011: Official presentation to local authorities, Medias and CSOs of the results of
the Gender and transport in Casablanca study. The event was co-organized with Casablanca
city hall. Documentation was distributed to participants and interviews were given to the invited
Media.

* December 12 th, 2011: Presentation to CSOs, Medias and donors via VC of the MENA gender
and transport study. The study was distributed to the invitees and recommendations have been
formulated by participants on the ways to improve public transportation taking into consideration
the gender dimension.

* February 2012: Through the WB newsletter Manara, dissemination of the Flagship report on
financial access and stability in MENA. Interview with the report TTL on the main findings of
the study, widely distributed throughout the Maghreb region.

(2009-2010):

* October 16, 2009: WDR consultation in Rabat - Reshaping economic geography
* October 3 0 th, 2009: Women Arab Investors summit in Skhirat.
* 
January 21st, 2010: MENA PSD flagship report.
* 
June 2 2nd, 2 3rd, 2010: Seminar on climate change adaptation and natural disasters preparedness in
the coastal cities of North Africa - Casablanca.
June 7th 
th , 2010: WB broadcasting in Rabat, Marrakech, Azilal, Ain Beni Mathar and Oum
Azza.
* October 26 th-28th , 2010: MENA World Economic Forum in Marrakech.
* November 1st - 2 d, 2010: INDH international forum - Agadir.
* October 2011: WB Access to information policy - PMV counterparts.

* 

9. 

Upcoming reports disseminations in current FY:

* Youth Inclusion study (planned for mid-May 2012).
* Social protection study (underway).
* Global and regional WDR study (planned for May 2012).

10. 

Official visits - Consultations with CSOs:

* February 20th , 2011 in Fez: Executive Directors official visit to Morocco. A consultation was
organized with Fez local authorities, academics and representatives from local cultural and social
associations. They had the opportunity to exchange with the EDs their vision of Fez and Morocco
development challenges.

* May 5 th, 2011 in Rabat: World Bank President official visit to Morocco. A consultation with
CSOs was organized to enable Mr. Zoellick to have a clear idea of Morocco civil society
demands and visions of the country's latest events and future developments.

Informal talks

11. 

Brown Bag Lunches

Two BBLs were organized in the past fiscal year to provide an exchange forum between the
World Bank staff and representatives of the civil society. The talks focused mainly in Morocco's
latest political and social developments in a sensitive political regional context. Driss Ksikes,

63

journalist, writer and director of a research institute (CESEM) and Sanaa El Aji, journalist were
invited respectively on March 3 0 th and April 14 th to an informal talk with WB staff

12. 

Informal dinner

A dinner was organized on July 12 th, 2011 with Country director, World Bank representatives and
two CSO representatives: Mrs. Bouthayna Iraki, feminist and businesswoman and Mr. Zouaoui,
economist, to exchange on Morocco's development perspectives.

13. 

Information and outreach

* January 2011: Copies of the CPS were sent to universities, libraries, foundations, donors,
associations and research institutes.

* Every two months: A copy of the new World Bank Maghreb Newsletter is sent to the World
Bank partners, Medias, CSOs and academics.

* Face book: A MENA WB page has been created in the social facility Face book where daily
reports are posted on the main highlights of the WB activities and projects in the region (blogs,
interviews, news...).

* Photo-shooting mission: A photo-shooting mission was carried out in March 2012 in Morocco to
expand the MENA photo database and to communicate visually and through interviews with WB-
supported project beneficiaries in Morocco on the WB endeavor in the country. The photos and
reports will be published soon and photos will be used to illustrate future WB reports and studies.

64

Morocco at a glance 

4/18/12

M.East 
& North 
Africa 

Lower
middle
income 

Key Development Indicators 

Morocco 

Age distribution, 2009

(2010) 

Male 

Female

Population,mid-year (millions) 
Surface area (thousand sq. km) 
Population growth (%) 
U rba n po p u latio n (% o f to tal po pu latio n ) 

32.0 
447 
1.0 
5 7 

331 
8,778 
1.8 
58 

3,811 
31,898 
1.2
41 , 46

75-79
60-64

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

92.5 

1,130 

8,846 

30-34 A
6 
4 
2 
0 
2 

GNI percapita (Atlas method, US$) 
GN I per capita (P P P,international $) 

2,890 
4,400 

3,597 
7,911 

2,321
4,784 

0-4

4 

5

GDP growth (%) 
GDP per capita growth (%) 

3.7 
2.6 

3.4 
1.6 

7.1 
5.9

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2004-2010)

Poverty headcount ratio at$1.25aday(PPP,%) 
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %) 
Life expectancyat birth (years) 
Infant mortality(per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (%of children under5) 

3 
14 
73 
32 
10 

4 
V. 
71 
27 
7 

U.

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

68
43 
24 

90
so

70.

60 

"

Adult literacy, male (%of ages 15 and older) 
Adult literacy, female (%of ages 15 and older) 
Gross primary enrollment, male (%of age group) 
Gross primaryenrollment,female(%ofagegroup) 

69 
44 

82 
66 
106 
104 

87 
74 
109 
105 

o-
40

.. 
.. 

20

20

10

Access to an improved watersource (%of population) 

96 

87 

86 

0 

.

Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population) 

51 

84 

50 

1990 

1995 

2000 

2009

amorocco 

0Middle East &North Africa

Net Aid Flows 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2010 a

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid 
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
European Union Institutions 
France 
Spain 

897 

1,048 

419 

912 

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

12 
135 
0 

29 
217 
33 

117 
155 
-1 

282 
238
191 

15

10

5

Aid (%of GNI) 
Aid percapita(US$) 

4.4 
46 

3.7 
43 

1.2 
15 

1.0 
29

o

Long-Term Economic Trends 

-lo

95 

05

Consumer prices (annual %change) 

9.4 

7.0 

1.9 

1.0

GDP implicit deflator (annual %change) 

15.2 

7.8 

-0.6 

0.6 

GDP 

-

GDP pr capita

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$) 
Terms of trade index(2000 = 10) 

3.9 
80 

8.2 
75 

10.6 
100 

8.4
100

1980-90 1990-2000 2000-10
(average annual growfh %)
2.2 
1.8 
5.1 
2.9 

Population,mid-year (millions) 
GDP (US$ millions) 

19.4 
21,079 

24.2 
28.8 
28,839 
37,022 
(%ofGDP)
19.3 
30.4 
18.9 
50.3 

32.0 
90,803 

1.0
4.9

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

1B.4 
29.8 
15.9 
51.1 

14.9 
29.1 
1.5 
56.0 

15.4 
29.7 
15.3 
55.0 

6.8 
2.4 
3.3 
1.5 

0.3 
3.0 
2.6 
1.7 

5.9
3.8
3.0
4.9

Householdfinalconsumptionexpenditure 
General gov't final consumption expenditure 
Grosscapitalformation 

61.8 
15.0 
28.5 

60.0 
16.8 
28.7 

61.4 
1.4 
25.5 

57.3 

5.0 
5.2 
2.3 

2.8 
2.3 
34 

4.7
3.9
8.3

7.5 

35.1 

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross savings 

19.9 
28.2 
22.1 

25.7 
31.2 
28.3 

28.0 
33.4 
24.3 

33.0 
42.9 
30.8

6.2 
3.5 

5.5 
4.4 

6.0
8.5

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary. Group data are for2009. .. indicates data are not available.

Pa. Aid data are for 2009.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

65

pr

Morocco

Balance of Payments and Trade 

2000 

2010

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob) 

7,419 

17,771

Total merchandise imports (cif) 

11531 

35,296 

Voice and accountability

Net trade in goods and services 

-2,085 

-9,884

Political stability

Current account balance 

-475 

-4,078

as a %of GDP 

-1.3 

-4.5 

Regulatory quality

Workers' remittances and 

Rule of law

compensation of employees (receipts) 

2,161 

6,270 

Control of corruption

Reserves, including gold 

5,138 

23,099 

0 

25 

50 

75 

100

Central Government Finance 

*2009 

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

02000 

higher valu- irn#y bdtor rateng

(%ofGDP)

Current revenue (including grants) 

23.6 

25.3 

Soume Kauftnann-Kray-Mastruzz, World Bank

Taxrevenue 
Current expenditure 

21.7 
23.4 

23.2
23.8

Technology and Infrastructure 

2000 

2009

Overall surplus/deficit 

-4.8 

-4.7

Paved roads (%of total) 
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people) 

56.4 

67.8

Highest marginal tax rate (%) 
Individual 

.. 

.. 

13 

90

Corporate 

.. 

.. 

High technologyexports

(%of manufactured exports) 

11.3 

7.1

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Total debt service 
Debt relief (HIPC, M DRI) 

20,674 
2,610 
-

25,403 
3,286 
-

Agricultural land (%of land area) 
Forest area (%of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area)

69 
12.7 

67
12.7

Total debt (%of GDP) 
Total debt service (%of exports) 

55.8 
20.3 

28.0 
8.7 

Freshwater resources percapita (cu. meters) 
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters) 

983 
12.6

929

Foreign direct investment (net inflows) 
Portfolio equity (net inflows) 

470 
30 

4,173 
544

C02 emissions per capita (mt) 

1.2 

1.5

GDP per unit of energyuse
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

8.3 

8.4

Composition of total external debt, 2010

IBRD, 2,468 

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent) 

355 

474

Shor-term,

1,800 

IDA, 13 

IMF, O

World Bank Group portfolio 

2000 

2009

Pnvate, 69 

Other multi- 

(US$ millions)

ateral, 7,668

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Interest payments 

2,837 
138 
307 
190 

2,543
241
238
93

Bilatera, 7,085

US$millions 

IDA

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
Disbursements 
Total debt service 

27 
0 
2 

14
0
2

Private Sector Development 

2000 

2010 

Time required to start a business (days) 
Cost to start a business (%of GNI percapita) 
Time required to register property(days) 

-
-
-

12 
15.8 
47 

IFC (fiscalyear)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio 
of which IFC own account 
Disbursements for IFC own account 
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account 

29 
29 
1 

152
152
23

Ranked as a major constraint to business 
(%of managers surveyed who agreed) 

2000 

2010 

7 

7

' Access to/cost of financing 
Pr Taxrates 

.. 
.. 

84.4
62.6 

M IGA
Gross exposure 

-

-

Stock market capitalization (%of GDP) 
Bank capital to asset ratio (%) 

29.4 
9.8 

76.2 
8.0

New guarantees 

-

-

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary. 
.. indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.

4/18/12

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

66

Millennium Development Goals 

Morocco

With selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2years) 

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition 
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %of population) 
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (%of population) 
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%) 
Prevalence of malnutrition (%of children under 5) 

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primaryschool enrollment (net, %) 
Primarycompletion rate (%of relevant age group) 
Secondaryschool enrollment (gross, %) 
Youth literacy rate (%of people ages 15-24) 

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primaryand secondary education(0) 
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%of nonagricultural employment) 
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%) 

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortalityrate (per 1000) 
Infant mortalityrate (per 1,000 live births) 
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %) 

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended byskilled health staff (%of total) 
Contraceptive prevalence (%of women ages 15-49) 

1990 
2.5 
13.1 
6.6 
9.0

58 
51 
38 
55 

67 

.. 

85 
66 
80 

332 
31 
42 

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (%of population ages 15-49) 
0.1 
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people) 
110 
Tuberculosis case detection rate(%, all forms) 
76 

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Accessto an improved water source (%of population) 
Access to improved sanitation facilities (%of population) 
Forest area (%of land area) 
Terrestrial protected areas (%of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons percapita) 
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent) 

75 
58 
6.8 

0.9 
9.7 

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people) 
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people) 
Internet users (per 100 people) 
Personal computers (per 100 people) 

16 
0.0 
0.0 

.. 

Morocco

1995 

.. 
.. 
.. 

2000 
6.3 
15.3 
6.3 

2009
2.5
8.8
6.5

72 
48 
38 
62 

72 

1 

57 
88 

228 
34 
50

0.1 
113 
73 

.. 
.. 

12.7 

11 

8.2 

42 
0.1 
0.0 
0.3 

79 
57 
38 
67 

80 
20 
1 

47 
40 
93 

228 
48 

0.1 
95 
91 

80 
68 
12.7 

1.2 
8.3 

4.9 
8.1 
0.7 
1.2 

91
80
56
80

87
22
11

38
32
94

12
83

0.1
81
93

96
51
12.7

1.5
8.4

11.
79.1
322
5.7

Education indicators (%) 

Measles immunization (% of 1-year 
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

100 

75 

50 

25 

0 

2000 

2005 

2009 

Primary net enrollment raio

- Ratio ofgirsto boysin prmary& secondary 
educationI

100 

75 

50 

2520n

0 

ri

100

70
60
50
40

0

1990 

1995 

2000 

2009 

2000 

2005 

2009

OMorocco 

OMiddle East & North Afrial 

OFixed + mobile subscnbersmintenet users

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available. 

4/18/12

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

67

Morocco

CAS Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 4/26/2012

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number ', c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$'000) 
Average Supervision (US$'000/project) 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012

7 
3.1 
14.3 
4.7 
14.3 
4.7 
21.4 

No 
1208 
103 

12 
2.4 
16.7 
15.0 
16.7 
15.0 
21.7 

No 
1147 
75 

12 
2.3 
16.7 
13.0 
16.7 
13.0 
14.1 

No 
1516 
77 

8
2.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.7

No
1447
90

Memorandum 
Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
125 
9
7,778.9 
581.2
26.4 
44.4
26.8 
37.5

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Note: CAS Annexes B3 and B4 not presented here-after as this information has previously been presented
for IBRD Program and AAA Program in Annexes 3 and 4.

68

Morocco Social Indicators
Annex B5

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

MNA 
LMC 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2004-10 

SP.POP.TOTL 
SP.POP.TOTL.ZG 
SP.URBTOTL.IN.ZS 
SP.DYN.TFRT.IN 

POPULATION
Total population, nid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per oman) 

' 

21.8 
2.3' 
44.9 
4.7 

SI.FOV.NAHC 
SI.POV.URHC 
SI.POV.RUHC 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

NY.GNP.PCAP.CD 
FP.CPI.TOTL 
FP.FPI.TOTL 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (2005-100) 
Food price index (2000=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

SI.POV.GINI 
SI.DST.FRST.20 
SI.DST.05TH.20 

Share of income or consumption
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Public expenditure

SH.XPD.RJBL.ZS 
SE.XPD.TOTL.GN.ZS 
SI.XPD.SOSE.ZS 

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% ofGDP) 

SE.PRM.NENR 
SE.PRM.NENR.MA 
SE PRM. NENR FE 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 

SH.H20.SAFEZS 
SH.H20.SAFEUR.ZS 
SH.H20.SAFERU.ZS 

Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 

SH.IMMMEAS 
SH.IMM.IDPT 
SH.STA.MALN.ZS 

SPDYN.LEO0.IN 
SPDYN.LEOO.MA.IN 
SP.DYN.LEOO.FEIN 

SP. DY N. IMRT. IN 
SH.DYN.MORT 

SP. DYN.AMRT.MA 
SP.DYN.AMRT.FE 
SH.STA.MMRT 
SH.STA.BRTC.ZS 

Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality
Ifant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

26.0 
17.3 
32.6 

670 
54 
53 

39.2 
6.7 
46.3 

.. 
.. 

1.7 

61 
73 
48 

.. 
.. 
.. 

45 
51 

.. 

59 
58 
60 

83 
115 

264 
207 

.. 

24 

M. East 
Lower-
& North middle-
Africa 
income

330.9 
1.8 
57.6 
2.7 

3,810.8
1.2
40.9
2.5

26.4 
1.8' 
51.9 
3.6 

13.1 
7.6 
18.0 

32.0 
1.0 
57.3 
2.4 

8.8
4.7
14.2

1,280 
91 
97 

2,890 
120 
127

3,597 
124 

2,321
130

39.2 
6.6 
46.4 

40.7
6.5
48.1

1.0 

.. 

2.3

72 
81 
63 

75 
94 
58 

88 
86 
9 

68 
66 
70 

57 
76 

234 
184 
228 
34 

1.3 

.. 

91 
92 
89 

96 
100 
90 

94 

.. 

10 

73 
72 
74 

32 
38 

.. 
.. 

132 
83 

2.7 
4.6 

2.1
4.1

89 
91 
88 

87 
95 
80 

87 
88 
7 

71 
69 
73 

27 
33 

155 
104 
88 
80 

87
88
86

87
95
81

79
79
24

68
66
70

43
58

201
136
230
67

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system. 
04/05/12
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due tc
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

69

Annex B6: Morocco - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 

Estim 
ate
2011 

Projected

Indicator 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
14 
27 
59 

100 
15 
30 
55 

100 
16 
29 
55 

100 
15 
30 
55 

100 
15 
30 
55 

100 
15 
29 
56 

100 
15 
29 
56 

100 
14 
29 
57 

100
13
30
57

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

77 
31 
4 
28 

75 
33 
5 
28 

75 
31 
6 
25 

75 
31 
6 
25 

76 
32 
6 
26 

78 
32 
5 
26 

78 
32 
5 
26 

78 
32 
5 
26 

78
32
5
27

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

36 
45 

37 
51 

29 
40 

33 
43 

36 
48 

36 
49 

36 
49 

36 
49 

37
49

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

23 
32 

25 
33 

25 
30 

25 
31 

24 
30 

22 
28 

22 
29 

22 
29 

22
29

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product 

75223 

88879 

90554 

90803 

100312 

98660 

104285 

110726 

117883

(US$ million at current prices)

GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

2310 

2570 

2830 

2940 

3000 

3050 

3200 

3290 

3460

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 98 prices)

Gross domestic product at market prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

5.6 
4.4 

4.8 
8.5 

3.7 
5.3 

4.8 
3.1 

3.7 
3.3 

4.8 
4.7 

5.2 
5.0 

5.5
5.2

3.0 

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 98 prices)

Gross domestic product at market prices 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

4.5 
4.7 
4.9 

3.7 
5.1 
3.6 

2.6 
0.5 
1.1 

3.0 
3.6 
4.6 

2.7 
3.4 
2.1 

3.8 
3.5 
3.5 

4.2 
4.3 
4.5 

4.5
4.5
4.5

2.8 
2.7 

Balance of Payments (US$
millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

27268 
15129 
34610 
29206 
-7342 
7661 
-70 

33430 
20095 
46267 
39573 
-12837 
8727 
-4637 

26182 
13973 
37026 
30189 
-10844 
7360 
-4930 

30308 
17577 
40192 
32648 
-9884 
7265 
-4078 

35456 
21969 
49507 
40818 
-14050 
7992 
-7986 

35536 
20567 
49202 
39912 
-13666 
8372 
-6814 

37650 
21032 
51606 
41800 
-13956 
9109 
-6205 

40072 
21701 
54775 
44415 
-14704 
9945 
-6240 

42779
22438
58330
47347
-15551
10899
-6256

Net private foreign direct 
investment
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

2183 

2002 

1476 

1574 

2382 

3000 

4000 

4500 

4950

370 
821 
-451 

1445 
1758 
-313 

2249 
1903 
346 

1600 
1130 
470 

3057 
2300 
757 

3743 
3066 
677 

3349 
2892 
457 

2945 
2608 
338 

2564
2394
169

70

Morocco - Key Economic Indicators (Continued)

Actual 

Estim 
ate

Projected

Indicator 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015

Indicator
Other capital (net, inc. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reservesd 

-291 

630 

559 

2091 

-13 

208 

213 

142

-2067 

1481 

575 

345 

456 

84 

-1352 

-1418 

-1399

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR98
prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 

-9.8 

-14.4 

-12.0 

-10.9 

-14.0 

-13.9 

-13.4 

-13.3 

-13.2

5.2 

-4.3 

-1.5 

33.5 

5.3 

2.3 

5.7 

5.7 

5.8

Primary 

1.2 

-9.4 

0.2 

27.5 

-3.4 

3.0 

8.0 

8.0 

7.7

Manufactures 

7.1 

1.3 

-4.0 

40.0 

5.2 

1.4 

2.7 

3.4 

3.9

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

20.7 

6.5 

3.2 

-5.5 

5.8 

5.0 

7.0 

6.8 

6.8

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues 
27.4 
Current expenditures 
24.1 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 

29.7 
25.5 
4.2 

26.0 
23.1 
3.0 

25.3 
23.8 
1.6 

25.7 
26.6 
-0.9 

25.4 
25.5 
-0.1 

26.0 
25.4 
0.5 

26.6 
25.0 
1.6 

26.6
24.7
1.9

Capital expenditure 

4.6 

5.5 

6.3 

6.2 

6.2 

5.4 

5.5 

5.6 

5.7

Foreign financing 

0.6 

1.6 

1.7 

2.1 

1.7 

1.8 

1.5 

1.4 

1.3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 

115.2 

117.0 

117.8 

118.3 

118.3 

119.4 

120.5 

121.9 

123.2

Growth of M2 (%) 

17.4 

13.5 

7.0 

4.8 

6.2 

6.2 

8.2 

8.7 

8.7

Private sector credit growth! 
total credit growth (%)

70.2 

63.0 

63.9 

100.6 

115.2 

75.1 

75.8 

76.7 

76.9

Price indices( YR98 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 

212.9 
139.9 
152.2 

295.6 
173.2 
170.7 

208.6 
130.1 
160.3 

196.5 
149.0 
131.9 

233.4 
162.9 
143.3 

213.7 
151.7 
140.8 

206.8 
148.5 
139.2 

201.9 
147.8 
136.6 

197.3
147.5
133.7

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)t 

87.0 

80.3 

82.8 

87.0 

89.9 

89.9 

89.9 

89.9 

89.9

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

2.5 
3.9 

3.7 
5.9 

1.0 
1.5 

1.0 
0.6 

0.9 
1.3 

1.9 
1.5 

1.8 
2.3 

2.4 
2.1 

2.3
2.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central
government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

71

Morocco - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 

Estima 
ted 

Projec
ted

Indicator 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

20543 

20825 

23751 

25403 

28475 

32238 

35387 

38133 

40496

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

651 

1102 

1842 

2534 

3072 

3763 

3149 

2745 

2364

Total debt service (TDS) 

4018 

4204 

3411 

3065 

2773 

3075 

3179 

3315 

3543

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb 

58.8 

50.4 

71.3 

67.6 

62.8 

72.7 

74.4 

74.7 

73.8

TDO/GDP 

27.3 

23.4 

26.2 

28.0 

28.4 

32.5 

33.7 

34.2 

34.1

TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

11.5 
29.4 

10.2 
34.5 

10.2 
33.8 

8.2 
34.2 

6.1 
36.3 

6.9 
37.6 

6.7 
38.7 

6.5 
39.7 

6.5
40.7

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)c

16.5 
34.2 

15.8 
39.0 

18.9 
49.8 

12.1 
43.5 

12.0 
54.0 

11.4 
52.5 

10.7 
50.4 

11.4 
49.8 

12.3
46.9

IBRD DS/XGS 

1.1 

0.9 

1.0 

0.7 

0.7 

0.7 

0.6 

0.7 

0.7

IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

2578 

2540 

2543 

2468 

2842 

3428 

4066 

4673 

5247

2 
16 

2 
14 

2 
13 

3 
12 

3 
10 

4 
9 

5 
8 

5
6

17 

IFC (US$m)

Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International
Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

72

Closed Projects 

154

lBRD/IDA * 
I
Total Dsbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Dsbursed (Cosed) 
of which has been repaid 
(Active + Cosed) 
of which has been repaid 

Total osbursed 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Cosed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Cosed) 

Active Projects 

202.37
1.16
2,416.01
2,842.90
2,618.38
2,844.06
613.29
13.73
627.02

MOROCCO
CAS Annex B8 -1

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 4126/2012

Last PSR 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Disbursements

Project ID 

Project Name 
ProectID 
rojct ameObjectives 

Development 

Implementation 
Progress

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

P117081 
P093719 
P 104265 
P 122028 
P098459 
P100397 
P094007 
P086877 

Overall Result 

GEF Integrating CC in the PMV 
Modem. of Irrig. Agric.in OER Basin 
ONE Support Project 
Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power 
Oum Er Rbia Sanitation 
Regional Potable Water Supply Systems 
Rural Roads II 
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 

S 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

MS 
MS 
MS 
S 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 

2011 
2010 
2008 
2012 
2010 
2010 
2006 
2006 

' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 

70.0 
150.0 
200.0 
43.0 
175.0 
141.5 
60.0 

839.5 

4.345454 

4.345454 

4.3 
69.4 
87.5 
200.0
42.9 
174.6 
14.3 
24.6 

617.6 

0.5
14.6
79.4

7.6 
58.9 
(77.1) 
18.6 

102.6 

0.8
2.2
(23.9)
(0.9)

(21.7)

73

CAS Annex B8-2: IFC Investment Operations Program

Morocco
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 3/31/2012
(In USD Millions)

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding

FY Approval 

Company 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici 
pant 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici
pant

2007 
0 
2010 
2008 
2008 
2010 
2000 
2008 
2012 

Al Amana - Maroc 
Altermed Maghreb 
Arif 
BMCE 
Capital n africa 
Kasbah 
Maghreb inv. mgt 
Mixta africa 
Saham finances 

Total Portfolio: 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
6.05 
10.68 
0 
5.76 
4.91 
0.02 
0.89 
70.96 

2.43 
0 
0 
93.33 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

12.44 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

99.27 

95.76 

12.44 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
1.18 
0.56 
0 
4.06 
4.91 
0.02 
0.89 
70.96 

2.43 
0 
0 
93.33 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

82.58 

95.76 

1.06 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

1.06 

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

74

