Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Report No: 20077-K1H

MEMORANDUM

OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE
INTERNATIONAL

DEVELOPMENT

ASSOCIATION

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL

FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONNA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
WORLD BANK GROUP

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

February 7, 2000

SoutheastAsia and Mongolia Country Unit
East Asia and Pacific Regional Office

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Eftective January 31. 2000)
Currency Unit
Cambodian Riel (RI)
RI I = US$0.00026
US$1 = RI 3,795
FISCAL YEAR
January I-December 31
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADB

-

Asian Develo ment Bank

ASEAN
AusAID
CAS
CARERE
CDF

-

AssociationofSoutheast Asian Nations
Australian Agencyfor InternationalDevelopment
Country AssistanceStrategy
Cambodia Areas Regenerationand Rehabilitation
ComprehensiveDevelopmentFramework

CG

-

CIDA
DFID
EC
EDC
FDI
FIAS
GDP
IDA
IDF
IDP
IFC
ILO
IMF
IOM
LIL
MEF
MIGA

-

European Commission

-

-

MOP

-

MWVA
NBC
NGO

-

NPL

-

ODA

-

PAP

PASEC
PER
PPI
PRASAC
PRGF
PRSP
RCAF
SIDA
SME
SOE
SWAP
TA
UNDP

UNESCO
UNHCR
UNICEF
UNWFP

-

--

-

VAT
WBI

-

WHO

-

Vice-President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

Consultative Group

Canadian InternationalDevelopment Agency
Department for InternationalDevelopment(UK)
Electricitede Cambodge
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment AdvisoryService
Gross Domestic Product

International DevelopmentAssociation
Institutional DevelopmentFund
Internally4displacedPeople
International FinanceCorporation
International Labor.Organization
International MonetaryFund
International Organizationfor Migration
Learning and InnovationLoan
Ministry of Economyand Finance
MultilateralInvestmentand Guarantee Agency
Ministry of PlanninR

Ministry of Women and Veterans' Affairs
National Bank of Cambodia
NongovernmentalOrganization
Nonperforming Loan

Official DevelopmentAssistance
Priority Action Program

Progamme d'appui au secteur educationau Cambodge
Public ExpenditureReview
Private Participationin Infrastructure
Programme d'appui au secteur agricole au Cambodge
Poverty Reductionand Growth Facility
Poverty ReductionStrategy Paper
Royal CambodianArmed Forces
Swedish InternationalDevelopmentAgency
Small and MediumEnterprises
State-owned Enterprise
Sector-wide Approach
Technical Assistance
United Nations Development Programme

United Nations Scientificand Cultural Organizaticr
United Nations High Commissionfor Refugees
United Nations Children's Fund
United Nations World Food Programme
Value-added Tax
World Bank Institute

World Health Organization

IDA
Jean-Michel Severino, EAPVP
NgoziOkonjo-lweala.EACSM
Natasha Beschorner. EACSM

IFC
Jemal-ud-din Kassum, CIOVP
Javed Hamid,CEADR
Wolfgang Bertelsmeier,CEAR3

- iii -

CAMBODIA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................
.

THE DEVELOPMENT

CONTEXT

A. POLITICALECONOMY:THE CHALLENGE
OF GOVERNANCE
.I
B. THE DIMENSIONS
OF POVERTY:THE CHALLENGE
OF ACCESS
C. SOURCESOF GROWTH:THE CHALLENGE
OF OPPORTUNITY
D. RECENTE
PERFORMANCE
CONOMIC .11
II.

THE DEVELOPMENT

.I
.4
.9

AGENDA AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS ....................................................

13

PRIORITIES
...............................................................................
A. CAMBODIA'SDEVELOPMENT
B. MEDIUM-TERMDEVELOPMENT
PROSPECTS
ANDTHEEXTERNALENVIRONMENT
....................................................

13
13

III.
V.

iv

TACKLING THE AGENDA: A PARTNERSHIP APPROACH ....................................................................

16

PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ..............................................................
A. LESSONSFROMEXPERIENCE
...............................................................................
B. CAS CONSULTATIONS
...............................................................................
C. CAS OBJECTIVESANDAPPROACH
...............................................................................
...............................................................................
D. PROPOSEDCAS PROGRAMANDACTIVITIES
E. CAS SCENARIOS
...............................................................................
F. MONITORING
ANDEVALUATION
FRAMEWORK
...............................................................................
G. MANAGINGRISKS...............................................................................

18
18
19
20
22
27
28
29

STATISTICAL ANNEXES
31-32
ANNEX1. CAMBODIAATA GLANCE...............................................................................
ANNEX2. SELECTEDINDICATORSOFPORTFOLIOPERFORMANCE
ANDMANAGEMENT
................................................ 33
34-35
ANNEX3. BANKGROUPPROGRAMSUMMARY
...............................................................................
ANNEX4. SUMMARYOFNONLENDINGSERVICES
...............................................................................
36
ANNEX5. CAMBODIASOCIALINDICATORS
...............................................................................
37
ANNEX6. CAMBODIA- KEY ECONOMICINDICATORS
...............................................................................
38-39
ANNEX7. CAMBODIA-KEY EXPOSUREINDICATORS
...............................................................................
40
ANNEX8. STATEMENT
OF IDA'S COMMITTEDANDDISBURSEDPORTFOLIO
................................................................
41
ANNEX9. CAS DIAGNOSTICMATRIX...............................................................................
42-50
ANNEX10. CAS SUMMARYOF DEVELOPMENT
PRIORITIES
.
............................................................................
51

ANALYTICALANNEXES
ANNEXA. POVERTYPROFILE
............................................................................
ANNEXB. GENDERPROFILE............................................................................
ANNEXC. LAND,LIVINGCONDITIONS
ANDVULNERABLE
GROUPSASSESSMENT:CONSULTATIONS
WITH
POORCOMMUNITIES
............................................................................
ANALYSIS...............
.................................
.
..........................
ANNEXD. DEBTSUSTAINABILITY
ANNEXE. PRIVATESECTORASSESSMENT
............................................................................
ANNEXF. PORTFOLIOANDFINANCIALMANAGEMENT
ISSUES............................................................................
ANNEXG. CAS CONSULTATIONS
ANDCLIENTFEEDBACKSURVEY...........................................................................

MAP IBRD NO. 28781

53
55
61
79
85
99
104

- Iv

-

Cambodia Country Assistance Strategy
Executive Summary
i.
Background and Prospects. In many respects, these are hopeful times for Cambodia. The country
is at peace, the economy is stabilizing, and recent economic performance is promising. Communities are
slowly being rebuilt and the country's cultural heritage is being rediscovered. With its accession to ASEAN,
Cambodia is redefining its political and economic position in the region. Yet Cambodia faces a formidable
array of development challenges. This is a post-conflict country where many of the foundations for growth
and development-physical, social, human, and economic-have been shattered and need to be put back in
place. Annual per capita income is $290. Over one-third of the population live below the poverty line, 90
percent of them in rural areas. They lack voice and access to services and opportunities. Both human and
physical capital have been depleted by decades of conflict, resulting in severe capacity constraints, and social
indicators are among the worst in the region. Social capital, destroyed by conflict, also has to be restored, and
trust in public institutions re-established. Allegations of corruption and impunity are widespread. The private
sector, the driving force behind the country's economic recovery in rural and urban areas and essential for
poverty-reducinggrowth, is constrained by limited and high-cost infrastructure, uncertain land and property
rights, limited access to credit, and a weak and unpredictable regulatory framework.
ii.
Cognizant of these challenges, Cambodia's leaders have pledged to improve the lives of the
Cambodian people: to attack poverty and restore social and economic infrastructure.!They are working to
build a stable macroeconomic framework and have made encouraging progress in raising revenues. They
have launched difficult reforms in the public sector-fiscal management, civil service restructuring, and
military demobilization-and have agreed to have these reforms closely monitored by local and international
donors. An IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) was approved in October 1999 to support
these reforms; a complementary IDA Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC) is being presented to the Board
with this CAS. Quarterly govemment-donor consultations, chaired by the Prime Minister, and recent
contractual arrangements with a reputable international non-governmental organization (NGO) to monitor
progress in forestry reforms are important indicators of a willingness to engage at the highest levels.
Dialogue with private businesses and civil society is increasing.
iii.
Cambodia has the potential to exploit diverse sources of growth: agriculture, natural resources, light
industry, and culture/tourism. Its ability to exploit these hinges partly on tackling its physical and human
resources constraints but primarily on the government sustaining the momentum of the reforms. Although the
reforms may take years to accomplish, they are essential for mobilizing investment and savings and putting
Cambodia on a sustainable growth path that will help to reduce poverty. Under the "full reform
macroeconomic scenario," as supported by the PRGF and SAC, Cambodia has committed itself to pursuing
structural reforms in public finance and public sector management and improving its fiscal discipline, while
making steady progress in institutional capacity-building, governance, and anti-corruption measures. This
would greatly enhance the effectiveness of aid and would stimulate private sector development, leading to a
steady 6 percent growth rate. Under this scenario, Cambodia could move out of the category of least
developed countries within a decade. Provided the private sector responds fully to this improved policy
environment and the regional recovery continues, per capita income could increase to US$440 and the level
of poverty fall below 20 percent by 2005.
iv.
CAS Preparation. This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) has been shaped primarily by inputs
from and interactions with the government and key stakeholders. The objectives and strategic approach
outlined below were endorsed during extensive and unprecedented in-country CAS consultations. The CAS
also draws on a substantial body of analytical work completed during the past year, including a Public
Expenditure Review (FY99), a Poverty Assessment (FY00) and specially-prepared notes on Gender, and
Land, Living Conditions and VulnerableGroups, the latter based on consultations with poor communities. A
'Royal Government's Platform on the Second Term, 1998-2003.

- v -

Private Sector Assessment has been prepared with IFC. A portfolio overview includes a detailed assessment
of project financial management issues and constraints (see Analytical Annexes). Sector strategy notes on
health, education, agriculture/rural development, transport, water supply, forestry, the environment, and
cultural heritage were also prepared. In addition, the CAS incorporates the results of a Client Feedback
Survey carried out in August-September 1999.
v.
CAS Objectives. This is the third Cambodia CAS, the first to be prepared jointly with IFC. It
furthers the broad objectives of the previous strategies (the last CAS was discussed by the Board on February
20, 1997) that focused on stabilizing the economy, rebuilding basic physical and social infrastructure and
limited strengthening of institutional capacity in the immediate post-conflict environment. The main
objective of this CAS is to help the authorities build the foundations for sustainable development and
poverty reduction for the medium to long term. These foundations are: (i) good governance including an
efficient and accountable public administration and a credible legal and judicial framework that safeguards
basic human and property rights; (ii) greater access for the poor to basic social services and economic
opportunities; and (iii) a policy environment that encourages private investment and entrepreneurship.Over
the next four years, coinciding with the present government's term in office, the Bank Group will support an
integrated package of measures to strengthen governance, improve physical infrastructure, rebuild human
and social capital, and promote the long-term development of the private sector, including rural incomegeneration. Interventions will be largely targeted to rural areas where the majority of the poor live, including
increasing access and opportunities for women. Capacity-building elements will be integrated into all
interventions, with an emphasis on knowledge transfer and the development of long-term skills and
leadership abilities.
vi.
Strategic Partnership Approach. These are ambitious goals in Cambodia's still fragile postconflict environment. They will be difficult to achieve by continuing to rely on the conventional projectoriented approach of previous strategies. A stronger partnership with the government and others in the
development arena, including donors, civil society, and the private sector, built on the shared goal of poverty
reduction, is essential. To reinforce this point, the government has also delivered a strong message to its
partners to work together in a more disciplined fashion to support its reform program and to build the
capacity of its institutions to reduce the burden of aid coordination and management. Strategic partnerships
should also increase the efficiency of aid utilization. In a climate of diminishing official development
assistance worldwide, Cambodia will need to reduce its dependence on aid, which now accounts for 9
percent of its GDP.
vii.
While building on the lessons and achievements of previous strategies, this CAS thus differs
substantially in its approach. Partnership is the central theme and strategic instrument. The Bank Group will
make concerted efforts to formalize strategic partnerships in policy dialogue, analytical work, and the
development and implementation of sector strategies under the government's leadership. Our resources
would then complement financing from other partners. The CAS therefore paves the way for a gradual
transition from an individual project-based to a more concerted approach based on shared sector strategies
and expenditureprograms. Sector-wideapproaches (SWAPs) will be explored in priority areas-governance,
infrastructure, health, and possibly education, to pilot this partnership strategy. In the initial stage of the
SWAPs, the government will take the lead in refining or formulating sector strategies, share these with all
partners, and then prepare expenditure programs to support them. Partners could then finance "slices" of
these expenditure programs through their projects. A lead donor would coordinate technical and financial
support in each area. For example, IDA would play this role in some of the proposed SWAPs. In others,
donors such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Health Organization (WHO), the UN
Development Programme (UNDP), and bilateral donors would take the technical lead. In a second stage of
the SWAPs, developmentpartners would work towards harmonizing project processingand implementation
procedures to lighten the burden on the government of administering projects.
viii.
Given the difficulties involved in developing these shared expenditure programs and particularly in
harmonizing procedures, it is likely that only the initial stage of the SWAPs could be developed during this
CAS period. SuccessiveCASs would carry the approach further. Moreover, since it would be too ambitious

- vi -

to initiate SWAPs in so many areas, carefully targeted project support will also be provided outside the
SWAP arrangement in other areas deemed important to the CAS objectives of increasing access and
opportunities for the poor, especially in rural areas, until the capacity exists to support SWAPs in most areas.
Developing SWAPs allows the CAS to adopt some of the principles of the Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF) that are useful to Cambodia but which can be adapted to its particular circumstances of
serious institutional constraints in a multiple donor-NGO environment.
ix.
In light of the above, a priority in this CAS is to expand the Bank Group's field presence. A fullfledged country office will be opened in FY01, with increased responsibilities for policy advice, monitoring
the government's reform program, collaborating with development partners and coordinating SWAPS where
IDA will act as the lead technical donor. The office will also gradually assume responsibilities for portfolio
monitoring, and more extensive dissemination about the Bank Group's activities.
x.
The Proposed Assistance Program incorporates the activities of the entire Bank Group. We expect
to maintain a presence in many sectors during this CAS period for several reasons. First, Cambodia is a postconflict country with enormous needs. Second, given the substantial presence of other donors and nongovernmental organizations, there is a strong demand from the government and other stakeholders for IDA
to play a coordinating and catalytic role over the short term, at minimum, to participate in policy and strategy
discussions. Further, through the proposed SAC, IDA has to be in a position to track public expenditure, in
particular sectoral budget allocations and disbursements. However, the CAS takes due account of the
activities and financial commitments of other development partners. The scale and scope of Bank Group
involvement will vary by sector, especially where other partners are taking the lead in assisting the
government with SWAP preparation. The focus of IDA lending will be on rural infrastructure and rural
development, health and education, with some fast-disbursing support for public sector/expenditure reform.
More limited lending is envisaged in the areas of govemance-anticorruption and legal/judicial reform-and
in capacity-building. Analytical work will be oriented primarily towards the SWAPs and advice on
governance issues. We will also assist the Govemment in preparing its national Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP), in collaboration with the IMF, beginning with an interim paper in FY01, and with related
analytical work, moving to support a full-scale PRSP in FY02. As donor coordination and the govemment's
capacity to manage aid improves, and the impact of policy reforms is felt, the Bank Group's involvement
will become much more selective, so that in the next CAS, our resources can be concentrated more narrowly,
but within a coherent overall strategic context.
xi.
A base case IDA lending program of $270 million is envisaged during FYOO-03.IFC loans will be
incremental and demand-driven. Conditions for the base case are the maintenance of a satisfactory
macroeconomic framework; successful implementation and systematic monitoring of priority structural
reforms supported by the PRGF and the SAC; the completion of a Governance Action Plan and the
implementation of priority actions; and the design and initiation of a pilot demobilization program for the
military, which forms part of a broader public sector reform program. Satisfactory portfolio performance is
also essential. Accelerated progress in reforms would trigger a high case lending scenario of up to $350
million, with increased fast-disbursing assistance. Policy slippage, deterioration in governance and renewed
political instability would trigger a low case in which lending would be limited to $60 million over the fouryear period, but intensive dialogue and analytical work would continue.
xii.
Monitoring Outcomes. More consistent and rigorous monitoring of development assistance and
progress in the govemment's reform program, is a guiding principle of the CAS, since it is focused on
poverty-reduction outcomes. The CAS outlines a preliminary two-tier monitoring framework comprising:
(a) a set of economic and social indicators (outcome indicators) consistent with global development goals
established by the international community. They will be further refined by the government and its
development partners in the context of the SWAPs and of the planned PRSP; and (b) intermediate
milestones, or indicators directly related to the Bank Group's dialogue and program with the government that
would contribute to the achievement of the above-mentioned development outcomes. Milestones would also
be used for self-evaluation.

-

vii

-

xiii.
Risks. Although external risks are significant, particularly because of Cambodia's reliance on
exports, the principal medium-term risks are endogenous. If the government's political commitment is not
sufficient to pursue reforms when they threaten powerful vested interests, if the reforms are delayed because
of weak institutional capacity, or if social unrestor political instability recur, then Cambodia's medium-term
prospects will be severely compromised. Some of these risks can be mitigated by concerted support by
donors and by continued policy dialogue and close monitoring, with greater involvement by civil society.
Other risks to the CAS program include weak project financial management and practical difficulties in
implementing the partnership strategy, including the SWAPs, due to resource and capacity constraints.
xiv.
Agenda/Issuesfor Board Discussion.
* Is the proposed partnership approach, and in particular the sector-wide approach, realistic?
* Are the proposed lending scenarios and triggers realistic?
* Is the proposed monitoring framework appropriate?

I.

THE DEVELOPMENT

CONTEXT

A. POLITICALECONOMY:THE CHALLENGEOF GOVERNANCE

1.
Cambodia is at peace. Political stability has been restored and democratic institutions are
being rebuilt. This removes the biggest obstacle to poverty reduction-armed conflict-and has created an
unprecedented opportunity for economic reform and social progress. After elections in June 1998, a new
coalition government comprising the two major parties-the Cambodian People's Party and Funcinpectook office in November 1998, led by Prime Minister Hun Sen. H.R.H. Prince Ranariddh, leader of
Funcinpec, is the President of the National Assembly. Mr. Sam Rainsy leads the opposition Sam Rainsy
Party. The next elections are scheduled for no later than May 2003. Cambodia has regained international
recognition, having been given a seat at the United Nations in December 1998 and having been formally
admitted to ASEAN in April 1999. Relations with neighboring Lao PDR and Vietnam are also being
strengthened. A trial of former Khmer Rouge leaders is envisaged; the format of the trial is still under
discussion. Civil society is becoming increasingly visible and engaged; there are now over 400 nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) throughout the country. Relations between the various branches of
government, democratic organizations, and civil society are complex and still being defined. For the key
players, the challenge is to move away from the politics of confrontation to more constructive and
participatory debate on social and economic issues. For the government, this entails recognizing political
dissent as an effective part of the democratic process, and hence an opportunity, rather than a threat; for the
Opposition, it means constructive engagement.
2.
The next political milestone will be the commune elections, tentatively scheduled for late 2000 or
early 2001. The government plans to bring public services closer to the people by deconcentrating
ministerial functions to provincial authorities and decentralizing decision-making to communes. A threetiered administrative structure comprising central government, provincial administration, and rural
communes is to be established. Local government laws (Commune Administration and Commune Elections)
are being drafted to create 1,600 commune councils countrywide. These councils are to be given formal
responsibility for defining local development needs and the legal mandate to plan and implement projects
and levy taxes. A parallel decentralization of budget responsibilities to provincial governors is also
envisaged. These measures, if implemented as planned, would be a radical departure from the current
administrative system under which local authorities are directly appointed and supervised by the central
government, and the budget is directly administered by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF).
Decentralization, while desirable, entails some risks, as the functions of the central administration are still
being consolidated.Despite the progressive provisions of the Constitution, women are still underrepresented
at all formal levels of decision-making,as in many developing countries. Nationwide, fewer than 10 percent
of all elected leaders are women. Under the proposed laws, however, each commune will be required to have
a minimumnumber of women standing for election.
3.
While conflict has ended, Cambodia's institutions of governance are still weak. This issue
overshadows almost all of Cambodia's development problems. The caliber of public administration is poor
as a consequence of the destruction of Cambodia's educational system and its educated elite in the 1970s and
of years of political uncertainty. In its current condition, the administration is unable to deliver basic goods
and services effectively. The civil service is overstaffed 2with about 160,000 civilian staff at the last count in
1995. Technical and managerial skills are weak, particularly in the areas of implementation planning and
financial management.Functional responsibilities, formal accountabilities, and integrity structures are barely
defined. Real wages in the public sector ($20/month on average) have fallen sharply in recent years as public
sector employment has expanded rapidly beyond the capacity of national budget resources to pay salaries.
Absenteeism is prevalent, largely because these wages are well below the poverty line or below sustainable
household incomes (estimated at $200-300/month),although civil servants are by no means the poorest of
the poor (see the next section). As a result, civil service productivity has deteriorated, and rent-seeking is
widespread. It is not uncommon to find that a great deal of the technical and administrative work is being
done by expatriates (including dual-nationality Cambodians from the diaspora) or local staff receiving salary
The overstaffing is in part a consequence of political reconciliation in 1993 due to the addition of political appointees from coalition partners and
also due to the automatic recruitmentof university graduates.
2

-2 supplements from donors through project implementing agencies that have proliferated in the past several
years.

* Public administration is particularly weak at the provincial level, reflecting low staff skills, lack of
budget resources and, in the case of some institutions, the most basic facilities3 At present, a large
proportion of local planning is undertaken with the support of donors and NGOs, for example, under the
CARERE/Seila program in Northwest Cambodia, which is supported by UNDP, or the PRASAC
program, which is supported by the European Commission (EC).4 These are being considered as possible
models for decentralization.
•

Corruption is widespread at all levels of the public sector. Examples include discretionary application

of tax and customs regulations, illegal logging, and unofficial sales of public services, such as land titles
and property rights. In the health and education sectors, poorly paid employees routinely demand ad-hoc
additional fees for services. Corruption in the judiciary has undermined business confidence. The
economic effects are being documentedand are potentially severe. For example, more than 5 percent of
tax revenues were foregone in 1998 because of poor governance (PER, 1999). Illegal logging (see the
next section below) has resulted in serious damage to the commercial potential of the country's forests.
In a survey of private firms conducted in 1998, more than 40 percent of enterprises reported that
unofficial payments were required for dealing with customs and tax authorities. At the household level,
the burden of rent seeking, particularly additional fees for health and education, falls predominantly on
the poor.
4.
The government has begun to tackle these problems, in collaboration with several donors. On anticorruption, IDA conducted a survey of enterprises in 1998,funded by the Danish Trust Fund on Governance,
and is currently, with the government's endorsement, surveying public officials and private citizens to
document the extent and impact of corruption. Other donors are also carrying out governance and corruptionrelated analyses (in particular the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and Australia. A civil service reform
program is being designed to restructure government ministries and agencies. In the initial stage, this entails
a census and functional analysis of all ministries and an updating of the payroll system. These efforts are
being supported by an IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF),' approved in October 1999, and
a proposed IDA Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC, FYOO)
.6 Implementing such an ambitious program will
require a clearer medium-tern vision and accountability/integrity model for the civil service, as well as
extensive support for capacity building. Public administration reform also will have to be more closely
integrated with public expenditure management reform at the central and provincial level.
5.

The basic legal framework for good governance is being developed. Many laws and regulations

have been drafted. A Constitution was adopted in 1993, civil, criminal, and commercial codes have been
prepared, and key pieces of legislation such as Land, and Forestry laws are in progress supported by
different donors. There is substantial compliance with core labor standards' A Labor Law was enacted in
1997. Cambodia has also ratified International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions on forced labor (29),
equal pay for equal work (100), freedom of association (87), and minimum wage (138). Problems of gender
pay differentials and continued use of child labor (see below) are still reported, however. Continued and
increased compliance will positively impact Cambodia's ability to export garments-its principal source of
foreign exchange-to the US in particular. In this regard, Cambodia was one of the first countries to have
signed a textile agreement with the US that ties its import quota with labor standards, based on a bonus
system. There are still major gaps in the legal framework in areas such as civil service accountability, torts,
commercial agreements, secured transactions (essential for the viability of the financial sector), and dispute
resolution, including commercial arbitration and foreign arbitral awards, andin the area of land and property
For example, Oxfam GB notes "Land titling facilities are extremely crude in all provinces. Documents are stored on dirt floors and offices have no
electricity, transport or fulmiture.Some remote provinces have no land titling offices at all." 1999 Oxfam GB: Cambodia Land Study ProjectParticipation in Land Reform.
' CARERE-CambodiaAreas Rehabilitation and Regeneration; Seila is a Khmer word meaning "solid rock"; PRASAC-Programmed'Appui au
Secteur Agricole au Cambodge.
5 With effect from November 1999, the IMF's Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) has been replaced by the new PRGF to emphasize an
increased focus on poverty. Under this new framework, the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) will replace the Policy Framework Paper (PFP).
6 A Structural Adjustment Credit (FY00) is being presented to the Board with this CAS.
Cambodia has established a minimum wage of $40 for the garment sector (only), substantially higher than in other sectors. These factories also offer
time-and-a-halfpay for overtime and double-pay for night shifts, Sundays and holidays. There is no distinction between govemment owned, local
private or foreign owned plants in this regard.
3

rights. This gap in particular creates uncertainty for potential investors in urban areas and farmers alike; the
absence of a transparent land management framework is one of the key issues in poverty reduction (see Part
II and Box 2).
6.
The process of legislation is somewhat muddled. Laws and decrees are drafted within several
different ministries and agencies with limited outside consultation. There is currently no administrative law
governing the rights of various agencies to issue laws or to determine the relative priority of different
legislative instruments. Moreover, once enacted, there is very little public information available either about
the laws themselves or the responsibilities of different institutions in enforcing them. Reflecting its dual
French and Anglo-Saxon legal tradition and different sources of extemal assistance, Cambodia has both civil
and common laws. A lack of harmonization allows for broad, and sometimes conflicting, interpretation of
these laws. Moreover, the enforcement of laws is generally unpredictable, and public skepticism about legal
institutions is high. Cambodia is perceived to have a prevailing "culture of impunity."The lack of training of
judges and court officials, low salaries, and the politicization of decisions, combined with the weaknesses in
the legal framework, have eroded confidence in the rule of law. This has prevented Cambodia from realizing
its full potential in terms of investment, which has added to the cost of doing business and weakened
citizens' trust in the law.
Box 1. Cambodia's Demobilization Program
Military demobilization is the critical first step in a multi-faceted program of security services reform that aims to
reduce the defense budget and build a defense force appropriate to the needs of a democracy. Defense still absorbs a large
proportion of government resources: 2.9 percent of GDP in 1998 (when combined with security expenditure, this total rises to
4.2 percent of GDP). This level is higher than the expenditure on economic and social services combined. With the return of
peace and stability in November 1998, reducing the size of military payroll was initially conceived as an opportunityto free up
scarce resources for development, the so-called "peace dividend". Successfully reintegrating war veterans into society also
presents an opportunity to rebuild human and social capital and to promote economic development in provincial areas. The
demobilizationprogram is expectedto reduce the number of soldiers in the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF) to fewer
than 100,000by end 2002. Concurrently,the Ministry of Defense is preparing a White Paper on Defense with advice from the
Government of Australia on the reprofessionalization of the RCAF so that it can respond better to present challengesincluding, for example natural disasters-and serve the country's democratic institutions. It should be completed by spring
2000. The "peace dividend" may not materialize immediately because of the costs involved in reprofessionalizingthe RCAF
as envisaged under the White Paper. Demobilizationinvolves four stages: registration, discharge, reinsertion, and reintegration.
Registrationof nearly 150,000 military personnel was completed in 1999. This process also helped to eliminate 15,000"ghost"
soldiers and 160,000 "ghost dependents" from the payroll and to transfer responsibility for 8,000 military widows to the
Ministry of Women's and Veterans Affairs (MWVA). According to the Executive Secretariat for Demobilization in the
Council for Administration Reform in the Council of Ministers these measures will contribute to annual savings of about $4
million. The next stages are expected to proceed as follows:
* Phase 1: Design and implementation of a pilot program by the Executive Secretariat with the full participation of donors and
civil society and technical assistance from Germany, Japan, and IDA. Performance monitoring mechanisms are being
developed. The implementation of the pilot is expected to begin in early 2000. 1,500 soldiers will be demobilized in the
provinces of Kompot,Kampong Thom, Battambang, and Banteay Meanchey. Special target groups are to be given priority: the
disabled, the chronically ill, over-age soldiers, and child combatants. A key design issue will be the nature and size of an
appropriatesafety net for ex-combatants and their families.
* Phase 2: The evaluation of the pilot program, particularly of process issues, in mid-late 2000, and the design of a full-scale
program to demobilize a further 30,000 soldiers over three years, beginning with a target group of 9,500 in the remainder of
2000. Both programs will emphasize long-term reintegration and the provision of benefits and services to veterans and their
fanilies at the community level. The design of the full-scale program will also take into account lessons learned from other
provincial development schemes such as CARERE/Seila (UNDP) and PRASAC (EC). Demobilization entails some risk:
potential for fake registrations and "remobilization"; difficulties in estimating the size of the assistance package that veterans
should receive; potential financial management problems and weak capacity for administration of the pilot program. The pilot
has been designedspecifically to see how such risks can be minimized.

7.
A further complex and sensitive governance issue is the future role of the military and security
services in Cambodian society now that peace has been restored. The government is in the process of
redefining the role of the military and security services, beginning with a pilot military demobilization
program, which is likely to be followed by a full-scale demobilization to downsize the army by one-third by
2003, and the fornulation of a security strategy/Defense White Paper on the reprofessionalization of the
armed forces (see Box 1). The motivation for this is partly economic-the need to reduce the defense and
security budget in real terms, since it is crowding out social sector expenditure, as discussed below,and to
make soldiers productive agents of society. It is also institutional-reprofessionalizing the armed forces to
streamline and consolidate the security services-and social: reintegrating veterans, particularly more

-4 vulnerable groups, into society and helping them to develop sustainable livelihoods. How the role of the
military is redefined is likely to have a significant impact on other governance-related issues, notably the
exploitation of natural resources (especially forests), land and property rights, and the functioning of the
judicial system.
B. THE DIMENSIONSOF POVERTY: THE CHALLENGEOF ACCESS
8.
A consequence of prolongedconflict is that access to social services and economic opportunities
has been severely constrained. Many parts of the country have only recently become accessible as the
security situation has eased. The government has not had sufficient resources to invest adequately in the
provision of health and education services or basic physical infrastructure, and this has retarded growth. As
a result, poverty in Cambodia is
Table 1. BasicSocialIndicators
widespread, particularly in rural areas.
Latest available data
Poverty rate (headcount)
Rural
Urban

.

EAP*
f.
l ..... SSA*

.
i...

Infantmortality(per 1,000livebirths)
Infant mortality (children under 5)
Infants under 5 moderately or severely
underweight %
Maternal mortality (per 100,000)
Gross primary enrollment %
Net primary enrollment %
Gross lower secondary enrollment %
Net lower secorndaryenrollment %
Gross tertiary enrollment % (M/F)
gLifeexpectancy(years)

|

6

l2L

...

ilS9
9..

,4

9AS?$:Q
.

.

0

..........

37.0
47.0
16.0

120.0
117.0
101.0
69.0
...

declined moderately since 1993/94 (39
percent headcount index), primarily in
prethadon0ne),piaiyi

...

Phnom Penh and other provincial towns, a
recent poverty assessment indicates that 36
percent of the population live below the

91.

...
77.0

-69

(see

A).

1993-96 was unbalanced, centered in

27.0

Phnom Penh and other urban areas, while
ehnd
.rural/agricultural
growth lagged behind.

__ ...
Nleenrn
e

51

Access to safe water (%of population)
=
77.0
47.0
Ranking in UN HD index
t37
Source: WorldBank, World Development Indicators, 1999; Cambodia Poverty
Assessment (FY00), *from Cambodia General Census, 1998, Ministry of

Planning.EAP=East
Asiaand Pacfic

poverl

...

..

S

capita for the country as a whole
was $290 in 1999. Although poverty has

...

.AO
*..

..

Urban

......
GDP per

This growth pattern is reflected in the
poverty profile. The highest incidence of
poverty is in rural areas (40 percent
headcount), four times higher than in
Phnom

Penh;

thus,

rural

households

account for almost 90 percent of the total
I poor. Three-quarters of the poor are self-

employed. The highest poverty rate (44 percent) is found among households where agriculture is the primary
source of income. Relatively low poverty rates (18 percent headcount) are found in households headed by
government officials and those employed in the health, education, transport, and communications sectors.
Poverty is higher among male-headed (37 percent) than female-headed households (33 percent). However,
female-headedhouseholds tend to be smaller, lack sufficient adult male labor, and often have more limited
access to land. Also, they are marginalized economically and socially (see Annexes B and C). Poverty rates
are also high for households in which the head of the household has had either no formal education (42
percent) or only some primary schooling, reflecting the inadequacy of rural social services. These two groups
account for four-fifths of the poor. Although data on income distribution are incomplete, inequality appears
to be rising. The Gini coefficient was 0.38 in 1993/94 and 0.42 in 1997; in 1997, it was higher in Phnom
Penh (0.46) than in rural areas (0.33).
9.
Given its violent recent history, Cambodia has a plethora of disadvantaged groups (see Annex
C) including internally-displaced people and returned refugees, war widows, orphans, child combatants,
people disabled during the wars and by land mines. One in every 250 Cambodians is disabled, and the
proportion of amputees-one in every 384 people-is the highest in the world. Women carry a
disproportionate burden of caring for the disabled. Vulnerable groups are also over-represented in the
growing squatter population of Phnom Penh, which increased from 80,000 in 1990 to 200,000 in 1997.
Squatters face increased health risks linked to unsanitary conditions and overcrowding.The formal social
safety net is extremely limited. Most of the small budget of the Ministry of Social Affairs, Vocational
Training, and Youth Rehabilitation (MOSALVY), which is responsible for disadvantagedgroups,is spent on
pensions for public servants, assistance programs for widows and orphans, and a limited rehabilitation
program for internally displaced people. The Ministry for Women and Veterans' Affairs has recently become
responsible for about 8,000 widows of veterans. Assistance for people with disabilities comes mainly from
NGOs. These programs reach only a small number of those who need assistance. The poor and vulnerable

thus rely on informal transfers, donor/NGO programs, and individual coping strategies. The prevalence of
child labor (the ILO estimates that at least 600,000 children aged 6 to 17 are economically active, despite the
provisions of the Labor Law), of cross-border trafficking of women and children in addition to legitimate
migration, and the rapid growth of the commercial sex industry illustrate the difficulties that poor and
vulnerable groups, especially women, face in securing more sustainable livelihoods. The poor, particularly
these most disadvantagedgroups, have little voice.
Box 2: Gender and Poverty
Gender issues are closely intertwined with development opportunities and constraints and poverty in Camnbodia.
In its hierarchically ordered society, women are considered to be of lower status to men, and gender stereotypes run deep.
Although women are nominally guaranteed equal rights with men in the 1993 Constitution, the ability to claim these rights is
subject to prevailing social ideals and attitudes about power and gender relations. As a result, women are seriously
underrepresented in political decisionmakingand at managerial levels in the public and private sector. In addition, women suffer
from the consequences of social disintegration:according to the 1998census, a quarter of households in Cambodia are headed by
widows or single women, who provide the sole support for their families. Many women are forced into prostitution out of
economic necessity, contributing to widespread trafficking and illegal migration from Cambodia to Thailand and a high HIV
infection rate.
Key issues that would significantlycontribute to the empowerment of women are:
•
Greater representation in decision-making. Women currently comprise only 10 percent of all elected leaders, including
those at provincial and village levels. Only 3.9 percent of economically active women work for the govemment, compared
to 14 percent of men.
* Increased educational opportunities.In 1998, the gross primary enrollment rate (total) was 89.7: for women it was 83.9
percent The gross lower secondary enrollment rate of women was 16.1 percent, and the gross upper secondary enrollment
rate for women was 6 percent. The gender gap partly reflects costs, partly social attitudes.The lack of formal education has
a direct impact on women's representation in the labor market; they fill a majority in insecure low-skilled positions. Male
earnings are 33 percent higher on average, after controlling for experience: the largest wages difference (75 percent) is
among workers aged 15-29 (Ministry of Planning, 1998). The inadequate education of women adversely affects their
health, as well as the health and educationalstatus of their children.
* Improvements in health status. Poor reproductive health is reflected in high levels of matemal mortality (473/100,000 in
1997). Access to family planning services and information is limited. Women are particularly vulnerableto HIV/AIDS.

10.
Many households do not have adequate or reliable access to food supplies. At least 20 percent
of rural inhabitants cannot secure enough food to meet the nutritional norm of 2,100 Cal/day. There is
widespread evidence of malnutrition, particularly among women and among children under 5 years; 49
percent of infants under the age of five were moderately or severely underweight in 1998. Low incomes and
high levels of indebtedness(estimated at 60 percent of households) are the primary causes of food insecurity,
aggravated by high variability in food production over time and across regions, low agricultural productivity
(see the next section) and inadequate infrastructure linking food deficit and surplus areas. Another important
factor in food security is the small size of average land holdings-mostly I hectare or less.
11.
Lack of access to land is a major contributing factor to rural poverty and income-earning
potential. This is partly due to the growing shortage of agricultural land in some areas and partly to the
difficulty people find in enjoying secure occupancy even when land is available. Cambodia does not yet have
an adequate land management framework (see Box 3 and Annex C). Recent field consultations, in addition to
ongoing research by others,8 have highlightedthe following specific problems:
*

Uneven land ownership distribution, with the top 10 percent of households in the communities surveyed
owning 40 percent and the bottom 40 percent of households owning 12 percent of available land;
* Gender inequalities in land ownership and access, aggravating the poverty of female-headed households;
* Large areas of usable agricultural land contaminated or allegedly contaminated by land mines and
unexploded ordnance and unclear allocation policies for de-mined land or for displaced people and
soldiers to be demobilized;
* Unregulated development of land in urban and peri-urban areas;
* Increasing landlessness due to land sales (to repay debts or obtain credit), alleged usurpation or
encroachmentby influential groups, or land speculation;
e
Restriction of access to common property resources (which had accounted for up to 20 percent of the
incomes of some rural households),often through concession awards (for forestry or fishing);

s OxfamGB CambodiaLandStudyProject;ADBvariousreports;AnnexC.

-6-

* Problems with encroachment of commercial fishing operations on small-scale local fisheries; and
* Growing difficulties in securing land rights, in view of the lack of clarity over land titling and the
absence of a map-based titling system, the weak capacity of land management agencies,9 and allegations
of corruption. Land and property rights are also very unclear in urban areas, except in the case of highvalue residential properties in Phnom Penh. The consequences of these uncertainties are an escalation of
land disputes and growing pressure on available agricultural land. The land issue has become highly
politicized and a high-profile issue in the debate on governance.
Box 3: Building an Equitable Framework for Sustainable Land Development
The framework for land use, land use planning, and land titling has received more attention recently, because of: (i) a growing
recognition of the importance of clarifying and strengthening the land law to facilitate the market-based development of
agriculture and other economic activities; (ii) dissatisfaction with the slow and inefficient pace of land titling; (iii) a surge in land
disputes and dispossessions, often associated with the accumulation of land by unscrupulous officials and the further
impoverishmentof the poorest families; (iv) concem about the impact of the government's forest concessions policy, which has
excluded poor people who depend on seasonal foraging for their subsistencefrom large areas of land; and (v) concem about the
further impact of the planned demobilization of 30,000 soldiers, many of whom will need agricultural land. The following
reforms were considered essential by all major groups that participated in the CAS consultation process:
Clarificationof the Land Law. The 1993 Constitution states that previous laws conceming state and individual property shall
remain in effect "except those provisions that are contrary to the spirit of this Constitution" (Article 139). The 1992 Land Law
and subsequent 1994 Law on the Organization and Management of Land, Urbanization, and Construction are the principal laws
applying to land. Although nothing in the 1992 and 1994 Laws specifically preserves earlier decrees, sub-decrees, and
regulations, current administrative practice assumes that many of these are still in effect. The revised Land Law currently being
prepared with the assistance of the Asian Development Bank aims to clarify all the laws governing the use and ownership of
land and other natural resources such as water, taking into account relevant circumstances (such as historical influences, local
customs, current disputes, and current laws). Work also needs to be done to ensure that any revised land law that is adopted is
implementedeffectively.
Land Use Planning. Planning for the various uses of land could help to allocate land to economically productive uses, to
protect against environmental degradation, and to discourage land-related abuse and corruption. The 1994 Law on the
Organization and Management of Land, Urbanization, and Construction provides the legal basis for the management and
administrationof land resources, in particular the conversion of productive agricultural land to construction or of forestry land
to agricultural use. However, the implementing regulations for this law have not yet been issued. Furthermore, for such
regulationsto be functional, institutional capacity for land use planning would have to be built up, especially in the provinces,
large urban centers and tourist destinations at a time when there are many competing demands on trained people.
Land Titling. While a lack of land titling per se has not constrained the development of a rural land market - farmnersare able
to buy and sell land without titles based on acknowledged possession - the land market has become distorted, which has had an
adverse impact on productivity and social cohesion. Registered titles have obvious value where ownership is disputed and offer
collateral for formal credit and the security needed for long-term investments in land improvement. Above all, possessing a
registered title can be useful to poor smallholders in high-risk areas in helping them to resist illegal attempts at dispossession.
Currently, less than 25 percent of rural Cambodian families have any kind of land document, while only 10 percent have full
legal land titles. As a matter of priority, land titling programs in Cambodia would need to target: (i) areas where there is a
perceived high risk of land conflict: (ii) areas where land values have risen or are expected to rise due to investment in
infrastructure;(iii) poor and vulnerable groups who run higher risks of losing access to land that they own; and (iv) areas with
high economic value and productive capacity.
There is also a need to provide legal protection for the customary tenure of rural and indigenous groups, including
managementrights in common property resources. Besides these reforms, a more complex agenda focusing on removing market
distortions, other legal reform and institutional strengthening, and redistribution of State land will be necessary to ensure the
optimum contributionof land to the development process and to provide equitable access for sustainable livelihoods.

12.
Poor standards of healthcare contribute significantly to poverty by reducing productivity and
increasing household indebtedness, particularly in rural areas. Levels of morbidity and mortality from

infectious communicable diseases such as malaria, dengue, tuberculosis, diarrhea, acute respiratory
infections, and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are among the highest in the world. These problems are
aggravated by inadequate water supply and sanitation services. Cambodia also has the region's highest
prevalence of HIV/AIDS (see Box 4). Non-communicable diseases are also increasing. In 1998, the infant
mortality rate was 89.4 (per 1,000 live births), the mortality rate of children under the age of five was 115,
and the maternal mortality rate was 473 (per 100,000live births), as compared to regional averages of 38, 50,
and 120 respectively. Programs have been put in place to expand access to health facilities through districtbased delivery systems and to strengthen immunization and other prevention programs. However, the
population's average annual contacts with the health services are low at 0.3 per capita, and the health
infrastructure remains too weak to cope with the high burden of disease. Shortages of essential drugs are
9 According to Oxfam GB's Cambodia Land Study project, in one province, 63 staff produced only 70 land titles in 1999.

- 7common, and drugs sold in private phannacies are not effectively regulated. Staff allocation to health centers
is not related to needs, and public health workers are poorly trained and poorly paid; many of them
"moonlight" in the private sector and are reluctant to work in remote rural areas.
13.
The cost of health care is an enormous
burden for households. The health sector is
chronically under-funded: 82 percent of healthcare
costs are paid by patients, 12 percent by donors, 2
percent by NGOs, and 4 percent by the
government (Poverty Assessment, FY00).
Cambodia's public health expenditure as a
percentage of GDP (0.4 percent in 1998), and as a,
percentage of GPthe government's budget (4.2

4. HIV/AIDS
in Cambodia
HIV Box
prevalence
in Cambodia
is the highest in East
Asia with 4 percent of the adult population aged 15 to 45
infected.The majority of HIV cases under the age of 20 are
female, most of them commercial sex workers. The estimated
number of AIDS cases is 150,000. It is not clear yet if the
epidemic has peaked. The highest prevalence rates are in the
southeast,in the central provinces, and along the Thai border.

next The economic and social impact of the epidemic in the
nt 10 years is potentially devastating. The direct costs of
HIV/AIDS include the private and public costs of treatment,
High costs for patients, particularly for the poorest care, and prevention, caring for orphans, funerals, and
who tend not to benefit from ad-hoc fee preparing the health care system to deal with the growing
exemptionsas is reportedlythe case for wealthier epidemic. The burden of illness and death will fall heavily on
exemptionsas is reprtdlhouseholds and are likely to lead to increased indebtedness and
households, have resulted in low utilization and the
forced sale of assets, malnutrition of children, and dropouts
development of an unregulated private sector. The from school. The most important indirect costs of AIDS are
government has started to develop essential private losses to households, extended families, and
preventive and clinical services deliveredthrough a communities.
district health service network, to control
Cambodia has a National Strategic Plan on AIDS
communicable diseases and make essential drugs prevention and control, backed by numerous donors and NGOs,
available, to develop the sector's human resources, including: the EU, IDA, UNAIDS, UNESCO, UNICEF, and

percentage

of the
govemment's
budget (4.2
percentin 1998)IS amongthe lowestin the world.

and to reformnhealthcare financing to increase the
efficiency of health expenditure and reduce the
burden on households.

14.

the WHO.NGOshave playeda key role,providinga rangeof
services including educationand social support. The key
challengesare improving prevention and public education. The
agenciesin question will need to ensure that programs reach
rural populations, particularly women, and that vulnerable

Cambodia's human capital has been populationsunderstandtransmissionmodes. They will also
depleted, reflecting not only the
need to develop realistic goals for prevention, ensure that
destruction of the education system in the 1970s research is undertaken on how AIDS is culturally translated at
but also subsequent low levels of public the local level,and increaseand sustainthe involvementof
politicalleadersand communityauthorities,includingreligious
expenditure on education. The education budget leaders, in prevention.
has stagnated at levels well below international
norms; in 1999, public expenditure on education was 1.3 percent of GDP. The total cost of education was
borne primarily by donors and NGOs (46 percent) and households (27 percent). The consequences are
apparent: low labor productivity and skills. For example, 24 percent of the total and 31 percent of the female
waged labor force have never received any education, and technical and managerial capacity in both the
public and private sector is limited. Girls are under-represented in formal education at all levels, particularly
at the secondary level and above, with adverse consequences for their health and for the health and education
of their children. Poor education is thus perpetuating the cycle of poverty and contributing to weak
governance.
severely

15.
Although considerable progress has been made in building schools and expanding education services
since the early 1990s and gross primary and secondary enrollments have increased, net enrollments are still
low at all levels, indicating high rates of repetition and dropout. It currently takes 19 years to produce a
primary school graduate. Infrastructure and accessibility are not the only problems, although the quality of
facilities is still very poor in many rural areas (for example, 70 percent of schools lack water and latrines, and
48 percent of primary school buildings are incomplete), and access to rural schools is constrained by lack of
roads. Other key problems are the quality of service provision and the cost of schooling, particularly for
poor households. Education quality in Cambodia is low due to excessive class size, shortages of basic
teaching materials, and inadequatelytrained and motivated teaching staff. Most schools have no budget for
materials, 91 percent of primary school teachers have lower secondary education or less, and virtually no
government funds are available for teacher training. Wages for teachers are below subsistence requirements.
Accordingly, both supply and demand factors explain low enrollment rates among the poor and significant
disparities in enrollment across income groups and between rural and urban areas. Higher education

-8institutions are inadequately equipped and staffed to meet the need for skilled labor and suffer from
governance problems. There is a consensus among policymakers, NGOs, and other observers that the
education system is failing to train the next generation of leaders and that this could be a costly failure for the
country.
16.
Improving Cambodia's educational outcomes will increase productivity, improve the population's
health status, and reduce poverty. Better education is also a prerequisite for the development of sound public
institutions and a vibrant civil society that can effectively engage in the national debate on good governance,
development priorities, and protection of the country's resources. The govemment and its development
partners have started to formulate policies, such as making the administration of the school system more
effective by decentralizing decision-makingauthority, lowering barriers to entry into the system for girls, the
poor, and disadvantaged children, improving teacher training, expanding opportunities for secondary
education, and rationalizing the provision and financing of higher education. An education sector review is
underway, with leading technical support from the ADB.
17.
Given the depleted human capital base, capacity building at the central and provincial level is a
priority in all areas, with critical needs in macroeconomic management as well as sector policy planning.
Project implementation skills need to be developed to strengthen the country's absorptive capacity. The key
question is how to develop capacity that is sustainable and effective for managing the development agenda,
including coordinating support from development partners. This will be critical if the government and its
development partners can shift to a programmatic-based approach to aid utilization (see Part III below).
Capacity-buildingefforts will have to focus less on skills substitution, and more on knowledge transfer, with
a stronger emphasison training.
18.
Physical infrastructure is poorly maintained and access to it is limited, especially for the
poorest households (see Annex C). Poor infrastructure is limiting access to economic opportunities, for
example, in agriculture, fisheries, and tourism development. It also adds greatly to the costs of production
and distribution and limits access to social services in rural areas.
*

Transport networks, particularly roads, are inadequate. The total road network in Cambodia (excluding
tracks) is 41,000 km, comprising 4,200 km of national roads-(of which less than 12 percent are paved),
3,600 km of provincial roads, and about 28,500 km of local or tertiary roads. This network provides
only about 0.65 km of road for everv 10 square km (1,000 hectares) of land. All roads have deteriorated
following decades of conflict and political instability. Emergency improvements were carried out on
arterial roads in 1991-1996, but many sections have deteriorated and are virtually impassable,
particularly for heavy vehicles, during the rainy season because of lack of maintenance. Aggravating the
situation is the poor condition of bridges on sections that have not been rehabilitated. The secondary
network is in a derelict state, virtually blocking access to rural areas. This road category has been almost
totally neglected, with all public funds having been spent on primary roads. Although there has been
considerable investment in tertiary road improvements,maintenance and coverage are major challenges.
It is clear that any attempts to reduce rural poverty must focus on improving road networks.
* Water supply and sanitation. Of the total population of 11.4 million, only about 3.2 million have
access to clean drinking water. The coverage outside Phnom Penh is around 20 percent, and, in rural
areas, only 4 percent of households in the poorest quintile have access to piped water. Even in urban
communities, only one-third of the population have access to water from protected sources. Women
bear primary responsibility for securing supplies. Over 30 percent of household expenditures in the
poorest quintile is on water. Sanitation coverage is minimal (less than 16 percent of the population),
particularly in rural areas, contributingto elevated levels of infant mortality and morbidity.
* Energy. Fewer than 10 percent of all households have access to electricity, the lowest electrification
ratio in East Asia. In rural areas, fewer than 1 percent of the poorest households have access to publicly
provided electric lighting. The absence of transmission infrastructure, the need to rely on individual
generatorsand expensive diesel fuel, and the limitations of public sector ownership and management all
mean that Cambodia also has among the highest energy costs in the world.
* The coverage of conventional telecommunications networks is very limited-fewer than I percent of
households have telephones-and service is expensive ($2.60 per minute minimum for international
calls). Service has been upgraded in Phnom Penh, and is being extended to the provinces along National

-9 -

Roads 1 and 5. The telecommunications' company is scheduled to become 49 percent privatized.
Cellular telephones are widely used in Phnom Penh; networks do not extend much beyond the city, but
are being expanded gradually. Information flow and media presence outside the capital is accordingly
sparse.
19.
The government is aware that the condition of infrastructure is such that the capital investment,
management and maintenance requirements far exceed the public sector's institutional capacity as well as its
funding ability. It has begun to formulate strategies and policies in the water supply/sanitation, energy, and,
most recently, transportation sectors. These strategies include using demand-responsive approaches to
providing services, promoting the participation of or strategic investment by the private sector in the
delivery of water services and energy, and establishing an effective regulatory framework for these privatepublic partnerships. Private operators already run utilities in some provincial towns on a cost-recovery basis.
Some Phnom Penh utilities are still state-owned and in poor financial condition; the government should
actively work towards privatizing them or offering them as concessions to strategic, including foreign,
investors. Key issues in the road subsector are how to finance continued maintenance, for example, by
collecting user charges for primary roads and involving the local construction sector actively in maintenance.
C. SOURCESOF GROWTH:THE CHALLENGEOFOPPORTUNITY

20.
If its physical and human resources constraints can be effectively tackled, Cambodia has several
potential sources of growth. The economy is still largely rural. Agriculture accounts for over 40 percent of
GDP and employs about 75 percent of the labor force. Rubber and fish are the principal export commodities
of this sector, and rice has export potential (although policies on rice exports have so far been inconsistent).
Other products include live cattle and some fruits, mostly traded to neighboring countries. Agriculture is
relatively small-scale and not input-intensive. Most land holdings are in the 0.75-1.0 hectare range. The
sector is dominated by rainfed rice cultivation that occupies about 90 percent of the cultivated area.
Productivity is low-rice yields at 1.5tonnes per hectare are among the lowest in the region-and the overall
cultivated area has declined due to war-related factors (such as population displacement, damage to
infrastructure, mines, and unexploded ordnance) and natural factors (such as poor soil fertility, flooding and
irregular rainfall, plant and animal pests, and diseases). Lack of access to production inputs-technology,
fertilizer, seeds, capital investment-is a major obstacle to agriculture development.Secure access to land is
also an issue, as indicated earlier. The high cost of transportation, given the condition of rural roads, and the
lack of rural financial services have raised the costs of marketing and distribution and have impeded
producers' access to larger urban markets. In border provinces, markets are typically more closely integrated
with those of neighboring countries.
21.
Despite these constraints, the agriculture sector has considerable potential to raise domestic
production sufficientlyto alleviate malnutrition as well as increase exports. Agricultural growth is driven by
the private sector. There are several measures the government could take that would assist the private sector
to increase production, such as programs to increase the yields and reliability of rice production, to upgrade
rural infrastructure, and to promote provincial development. So far, provincial development has been
overwhelmingly financed and largely managed by donors and NGOs, but this has led to a profusion of
projects and approaches that could be coordinated more effectively so that the lessons of previous experience
can be applied in ways that will encourage future growth.
22.
Forestry in 1998 (excluding illegal logging) accounted for 6.1 percent of GDP and $180 million in
foreign exchange receipts. If carefully managed, forestry is a potential source of growth in terms of highvalue commercial timber, ecotourism, and wood industries. Community forestry could contribute to raising
rural incomes. However the viability of this sector has been seriously jeopardized by illegal logging in the
1990s (estimated at 4 million cubic meters in 1997, compared to a sustainable level once estimated at 0.5-1.0
million cubic meters) which has resulted in serious damage to the commercial potential of the forest.
Moreover, by virtue of increased access and reduced stocking, forest areas are now more susceptible to
uncontrolled agriculturalencroachmentand need to be protected from repeated logging. It is not clear now if
a production level of 0.5 million cubic meters could be sustained. The government has made forestry reform
a top priority and has adopted a detailed reform program, endorsed at the highest level. Forestry reform is
being supported by the PRGF and proposed SAC and is being implemented in partnership with IDA, the
ADB, the FAO, UNDP, Australia and the UK. Principal measures include regulatory reforms, restructuring

- 10-

of the concession system, developing a systematized approach to forest law enforcement including the
establishment of a forest crime monitoring unit, and developing a consolidated legal framework that
includes community forestry. In a very positive move, the government has recently appointed an
internationalNGO, Global Witness, to act as an independentmonitor of forestry reforms.
23.
Biodiversity is a potential and barely tapped source of growth. Mapping and safeguarding areas with
a high degree of biodiversity, beginning with Virachey National Park in the north-east, can generate local
income through specialized ecotourism. Key issues in such areas are controlling land conversion, and
ensuring that the inhabitants of local villages are closely involved in management and planning. Moreover,
beyond establishment of national parks, establishing a broad system of environmental safeguards will be
important in the medium term, given Cambodia's reliance on natural resource exploitation. Environmental
issues are not yet integrated into national and local development initiatives or investment planning.
Cambodia has prepared a national environmental action plan that identifies such medium-term needs as
sustainable management of fisheries and floodplain agriculture in the Tonle Sap region,of coastal fisheries,
and urban/industrialwaste control. Yet the government lacks the resources to implement the plan.
24.
Beyond agriculture and natural resources, Cambodia also has considerable potential for further
private sector growth in manufacturing and services, as demonstrated by the proliferation of microenterprises, small and medium enterprises
Box 5: Cambodia'sFinancialSector
(SMEs), and multinationals (see Annex E). * Cambodia's financial sector is still developing. Only 10 percent of
Ten percent of private businesses are
the population have access to the formal banking sector.
foreign-owned, and these generate about half
Cambodia is overbanked with 31 commercial banks, only 9 of
of the total value added in the private sector.
which have provincial branches. The provinces are poorly served.,
The largest investors are Malaysia, Taiwan,
with 16provinceshavingno financialinstitutionsat all.
The financialsystemis very shallowwith an M2/GDPratio of
and China. Most foreign direct investment
11.4 percent at the end of 1998. Banks play a negligible role in
(FDI) has gone into the textile and garment
mobilizing savings. Real interest rates for loans are high at 10-30
sub-sectors and, to a lesser extent, into
percent per year.
hotels/tourism, food, and wood processing. , Regulation of banks needs to be strengthenedand the capacity of
In addition, a vibrant informal sector
the NationalBank of Cambodia(centralbank) staff upgradedto
enablebettersupervision.Informationon bank portfolioqualityis
employs at least 1.6 million people
limited.
nationwide. As a small open economy, * New banking legislation (central and commercial banking) was
Cambodia's membership in ASEAN
enacted in 1999.Over the medium term, policy reforms to support
provides it with access to key markets for its
the financialsector includethe definitionof land and property
rights, (without which collateralized lending is unlikely to
products. Increasing inflationary pressures in
develop), secured transactions, the adoption of the Basle Capital
neighboring countries, combined with the
Adequacy standard, adherence to accounting standards and
low cost of labor, ease competitive pressures
financial reporting, and the development of an effective
on the local economy and provide an
paymfents
system.
opportunity for stimulating investment and * Non-bank financial institutions or services (insurance, leasing,
capitalmarkets,and creditunions)have notyet been established.
increasingproductivity levels.
Informal money-lenders operate in many areas. There is a
25.
Principal growth areas are in light 2 potential
market
forrural
leasing.
Microfinance
and
creditservicesare emergingrapidly.The
industry, notably garments, which accounted
govemment has also established a Credit Community for Rural
for two-thirds of exports in 1999, benefiting
Development(CCRD)and a Rural Development Bank (RDB), but
from General System of Preferences and
these do not yet operate effectively.
Most Favored Nation status. The government * Several institutions, including IFC are supporting the new
ACLEDABank, which was previouslya microfinanceNGO.
signed a textile agreement with the US in
About 71 other NGOs are involved in microfinance activities,
January 1999 placing quotas on some
accounting for about $20 million in loans to 300,000 borrowers,
categories of garment exports to the US. The
although only a few of these institutions are potentially
quota was based on 1998 production levels
commerciallyviable.
but offers 14 percent additional quota if the
The governmentis currently preparing a road map for the
buS goffersm14mperent
deternines quothat
workifinancial
sector,withthe assistanceof the ADB.
US government determines that working
conditions in the garment industry comply with internationally recognized core labor standards. So far,
Cambodia has received a bonus increase of five percent. Other potential growth areas are shoes, textiles,
toys, and agro-industry. In the services sector, Cambodia's rich cultural heritage (over 3,000 recognized
Angkorian and pre-Angkorian sites including 1,300 temples as well as performing arts) could form a rich
basis on which to develop tourism. Tourism was depressed by the events of 1997 and the regional crisis but

-11 -

is making a strong recovery. Arrivals were up 35 percent in the first nine months of 1999; investment in
tourism facilities near the Angkor Wat temples of Siem Reap has increased rapidly. The ADB is assisting
with the expansion of Siem Reap airport, for example.
26.
There are opportunities for further privatization of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and improved
competition policies in sub-sectors dominated by SOEs. An initial round was launched in 1995 but has
proceeded slowly. There are about 100 remaining SOEs. The government has recently announced the
possible privatization of large rubber plantations, but no schedule has been established. The Foreign Trade
Bank is envisaged to be privatized by end-2001. There is also considerable potential for expanding private
participation in infrastructure (PPI), including attracting private capital and management skills via the
privatization or concessioningof state-owned utilities, as indicated above.
27.
To realize this potential for private sector development several constraints in the business
environment, as articulated by business leaders, will need to be addressed. Priorities are tackling the dearth of
public information on laws, regulations, and official procedures such as tax and customs requirements and
cracking down on rent-seeking activities that result from this information gap and lack of public
accountability. Regulations on land and property rights clearly need to be strengthened and mechanisms for
contractual enforcement and dispute resolution developed. There is also a need to develop a policy and
regulatory framework for PPI that clarifies the responsibilities of government institutions and regulates
utilities. This will promote accountability and a sounder competitive framework thatwill eventually result in
more reliable and less expensive service provision. The high cost and unreliability ofthe power supply has
required many businesses to set up their own electricity generators, for example. Several businesses have
emphasized the need to develop financial institutions that meet the growing demand for credit, including
microfinance,especially from SMEs and micro-enterprises (see Box 5). Although Cambodia is overbanked,
the volume of lending to the majority of private businesses is very limited, and most enterprises rely on
informal transfers. Finally, almost all businesses that were consulted mentioned continuing problems of
securityand banditry, particularly in provincial areas.
28.
Overcoming these constraints will be important for the medium term as the private sector will
increasingly need to complement or replace public investment in economic and social sectorsto absorb the
public sector workforce as the civil service and armed forces are downsized, and to absorb rising
employment demands. Sixty percent of the population is under the age of 20, so pressures on the labor
market will inevitably increase. Private sector development will also facilitate Cambodia's further
integration into the regional and global economies, thus providing it with larger markets. Private enterprises
could take a more active lead in improving the business climate by advocating regular and open dialogue
with government on key issues and concerns. Some business associations that could play such a role are
developing, such as the Chamber of Commerce, the International Business Club, and the Women's Business
Association in Phnom Penh. SMEs are not yet well represented by associations.
D.

RECENT

29.
Cambodia's
ability
to
exploit its sources of growth in a

sustainable manner to

reduce

poverty is contingent not only on
investment in physical and human

capital but on the government's
S
ability
to
pursue
difficult
macrocconiomic,

structural,

governance reforms.
government has

undertaken

and

The
a

ECONOMIC

PERFORMANCE
Box 6: Recent Economic Policy Reforms

.* The
exchange ratehas been liberalized.
Prices have been liberalized,except for utilities.
Privatizationwas launched in 1995.
.

An organic Budget Law has been enacted. A new FinancialLaw has been passed. Public Investment

Plans have been prepared.
* Private sector trading is permitted. Licensing requirements have been eliminated for most goods.

Importtariffshavebeenstreamlined,
and limitedexportrestrictionsintroduced.
A two-tier banking system has been set up. Interest ceilings have been eliminated. Commercial bank
reserve requirements have been introduced. A Central Bank Law strengthening the autonomy of the
National Bankhas been enacted. A CommercialBanking Law was enacted in November 1999.

sA
Lawon Investmentwas adoptedin August1994.
Tax lreforms have been adopted.

VATwas introducedin Januasy 1999.

. TheCommercial Code, a Forestry Code, and a revised Land Law were drafted in 1999.
. The SupremeCouncilon StateReformhasbeenestablishedto managepriorityreforms.

number of economic policy reforms
in recent years, particularly in 1994-96 (see Box 6), reflected in GDP growth rates of up to 6.5 percent by
1996. However, without effective institutions and strategic policies for the medium term and,given a hiatus
in 1997-98, the economy has so far grown more slowly than it could have, and poverty has not been
significantly reduced in the past few years.

- 12

-

30.
Cambodia weathered the stagnation of 1997 and 1998 when domestic political instability combined
with the regional crisis depressed private investment, led to the suspension of donor assistance, and retarded
growth. The impact of the shocks was substantial, but Cambodia maintained positive growth: GDP growth
fell from 7 percent in 1996 to I percent in 1997 and in 1998. Construction and tourism were hard hit; the
slump in agriculture was exacerbated by bad weather and poor rice harvests. Foreign investment dropped
from $240 million in 1996to $120 million in 1998. Inflation, which had come down to single digits in 1997,
increased to 14.8 percent in 1998 mainly because of rice
price increases in the run-up to the elections. However, 0
because of macroeconomic instability and political .0 i
s
uncertainty, the government was not able to sustain the
i50
momentum of the policy reforns that had been initiated in
40
1994-96. Little progress was made in 1997-1998 in
30
lovernment
*
improving govemnancein fiscal management. Hence, fiscal
20OD
performance in 1997 and 1998 was weak, with shortfalls in
10
revenue collection (at 8.7 percent of GDP in 1998, one of
oNGo
the lowest levels in the world). This was attributable
1994 1995
1996
1997
mainly to tax exemptions, tax evasion, and inadequate FIGURE 1. CAMBODIA'S AID DEPENDENCE
capture of forestry royalties because of widespread illegal (% of public expenditure financing, by source).
0 (between 3.3 and
logging. Excessive defense expenditure"
Source: Cambodia Public Expenditure Reviewv,1999.
5 percent of GDP annually from 1994-1998) crowded out
the social sectors (public expenditure on health and
education accounted for 0.7 percent and 1.3 percent of GDP respectively in 1998). To make up the budget
shortfall due to increased security-related expenditure in 1998 and to finance pre-election costs, the
government borrowed the equivalent of 0.8 percent of GDP from the central bank for the first time.
.

31.
With inadequate domestic revenue mobilization and skewed expenditure allocation, Cambodia
became heavily dependent on aid for financing the provision of basic goods and services. Donors financed
about 60 percent of public expenditure in 1997, including 53 percent of expenditure on social sectors and 83
percent of expenditure on economic services, including rural development and infrastructure. Aid now
constitutes 9 percent of GDP.
32.
The new political environment has led to significant policy changes, and these have spurred the
first signs of recovery and growth. In 1999, the government made considerable efforts to strengthen

fiscal management, with the successful implementation of a value-added tax (VAT), which became
effective on January 1, 1999. Customs revenues have also increased with the upswing in trade. The
implementing regulations for the Law on Investment have been amended to reduce tax exemptions. The
authorities have taken high-profile actions against illegal logging and increased the level of forestry royalties
from $14 to $54 per cubic meter. On the expenditure side, the government has recently instituted priority
action programs in key social and economic sectors (health, education, rural development, agriculture, and
public works) has pledged to reduce defense expenditure in real terms by 2003, and is monitoring the quality
of public expendituremore closely.
33.
The government's commitment on public expenditure reform, the progress on revenues,and the
launching of civil service and military reform have all sent a positive signal. This led to the approval of the
PRGF, for which many of these reforms were considered prior actions, the reopening of the IMF office in
Phnom Penh, and IDA's willingness to proceed with the preparation of a SAC. Growth in 1999 was 4
percent, with a rebound in agricultural production (3.8 percent) and a modest upturn in tourism (services
grew 4.2 percent), while inflation fell to around 5 percent. The exchange rate is stable at around
Rls3,800/US$1, and reserves were $428 million at the end of 1999 or 3.4 months of imports. The fiscal
deficit was about 4 percent of GDP, fully covered by external support.

It is difficult to obtain a reliablepicture on total public (govemment and extemally-financed) expenditure because a significant portion of aidfinanced expenditures is not captured by the budget. See Cambodia Public Expenditure Review (FY99). Investment and recurrent budgets are not
integrated at present.
1'

- 13 -

II.

THE DEVELOPMENT

AGENDA AND MEDIUM-TERM

PROSPECTS

A. CAMBODIA'S DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES

34.
The challenge to Cambodia is to convert the achievements of 1999 into sustained growth for the next
generation so incomes can be raised, opportunities created for the rural poor, and rural poverty reduced.
Cambodia can only grow and reduce poverty and aid dependence if it continues to:
* Develop institutions of good governancethat provide for sound decision-making, accountability and
reduced corruption, and the rule of law that protects human and property rights and that creates
incentives for all private investorsfrom smallholdersto larger enterprisesjI
* Develop its institutions of government to ensure a stable macroeconomy, sound fiscal policy, and the
ability to deliver basic public goods and services such as health and education to the poor, while
protecting natural resources;
* Enact reforms that allow private businesses to spearheadgrowth, particularly in rural areas, through more
efficient land and forestry management, and by linking the poor to markets through better rural
infrastructure;and
• Build the capacity of its institutions at all levels.
35.

There is a convergence of views between the government and its development partners on this long-

term developmentagenda.TheRoyal Government's Platform on Second Term, 1998-2003 aimsto reduce
poverty by: (i) safeguarding social stability and security; (ii) building human capacity; (iii) strengthening
infrastructure and fostering an environment for private investment; (iv) fully protecting and preserving the
natural environment; (v) enhancing national revenues in the context of a fully accountable and transparent
fiscal policy; and (vi) encouraging the private sector as an engine of growth, investment, and employment
creation. The government and development partners have also agreed that the short to medium-term priorities
are to tackle fundamental fiscal and governance problems. If these are not resolved it will be difficult to
tackle the longer term agenda and reduce poverty. Over the next three years the government therefore intends
to focus its reform efforts on increasing domestic revenue mobilization, improving inadequate and
inefficient expenditure management and environmentally unsustainable forest management and reforming
the public sector.12 This reform agenda, supported by the PRGF and the proposed SAC, comprises the
following main elements:
* Increasing domestic revenue mobilization through the VAT; developing a clearer and more even-handed
tax incentive system under the Law on Investment, and improving tax administration, tax audits, and
customs administration;
* Transferringnon-tax revenues, particularly from forestry revenues, into the budget more effectively,
continuingto suppress illegal logging, strengthening forest concession management and forest crime
monitoring, and improving forest law;
* Rationalizingpublic expenditure, including ensuring that allocations to health, education, agriculture,
rural development, and public works are realized to the fullest extent possible;
* Improving public expenditure management by establishing a budget strategy and execution center in the
Ministry of Economy and Finance, adopting sector-wide approaches in consultation with donors and
NGOs (see Part III below), and developing a medium-term expenditure framework;
* Preparing for military demobilization (pilot demobilization) and public administration reform (a census
and a functional analysis of the civil service); and
• Formulating a Governance Action Plan that incorporates ongoing diagnostic work with development
partners and consultations with the private sector and civil society, disseminating it publicly, and
implementing priority actions.
B. MEDIUM-TERMDEVELOPMENT
PROSPECTSANDTHEEXTERNALENVIRONMENT
36.
Macroeconomic projections. If progress is made in implementing these reforms, substantial propoor growth is feasible over the medium term. Changes in government policy will allow Cambodia to take
advantage of the current robust international environment and maintain strong export growth. Exports could
grow by 8 percent annually, led by the garment sector, assuming continued macroeconomic stability and
" The 1997 WorldDevelopment Report demonstrates a strong correlation between private investors' evaluation of a govemment's credibilityand its
record of growth and investmentand shows that corruption fundamentally undermines state credibility.
12 For details of the medium-term reform program, see the govemment's Letter of Development Policy, Structural Adjustment Credit (FYOO).

-14-

government investment in social and economic infrastructure to support private sector activity. Current
projections (See Table 2) suggest that, under a full reform scenario, revenue would increase from 8.7
percent of GDP in 1998 to around 13 percent by 2002. Public expenditure would be reoriented towards the
social sectors and, as the government's removal of "ghost" soldiers and the planned military demobilization
are expected to contribute to some reductions in defense and security spending. The fiscal deficit is expected
to consolidate at around 6 percent of GDP. As a result, public investment would increase from 5 percent to 7
percent of GDP by 2003. It would be supplemented by increased private sector investment, which would
reach 16 percent of GDP by 2003, in response to the improved environment for domestic and foreign direct
investment. FDI is expected to increase steadily at 9 percent per annum.
37.
The current account deficit, excluding official transfers, will decline gradually from about 13 percent
of GDP in 1999 to II percent by 2005. Cambodia's external financing requirements are expected to ease as
concessional aid gradually declines and FDI picks up. Under this scenario, GDP growth would be 6 percent
by 2001, and annual inflation would stabilize at around 4 percent. Six percent GDP growth is comparable to
the average growth rate during 1991-96.Agriculture is expected to grow at 3-4 percent, industry at about 8-9
percent driven by increased manufacturing activity and construction, and services at about 7 percent.
Private sector activity would play an increasing role in reaching this target, reflected in substantial increases
in private savings, private investment, and exports. Under this scenario, better fiscal discipline combined
with steady progress in institutional capacity building, governance, and anti-corruption measures would
enhance the effectiveness of aid. 13
38.
Poverty Impact. These developments could enable Cambodia to move out of the category of least
developed countries, or the lowest quintile of World Bank member countries by income status, within the
next decade. Under the full reform scenario, per capita income could increase steadily from $290 in 1999 to
$360 in 2002 and further to $440 in 2005. In parallel, the level of poverty could fall from 36 percent in 1999
to 27 percent by 2002 and further to 19 percent by 2005. Given these potential outcomes, the significance
of implementing the full reforms is apparent. The strong projected impact of growth on poverty reduction
may be due partly to the fact that Cambodia's poverty gap (in other words, the gap between the average
expenditure of poor households and the poverty line) is smaller than that of neighboring countries such as
Lao PDR and Vietnam. It should be emphasized that these poverty projections are based on the assumption
that there would be no changes in income distribution. The recent increase in inequality-the Gini
coefficient rose from 0.38 in 1993-94to 0.42 in 1997-suggests that the projections may be too optimistic as
widening inequality would offset the positive effect of growth in reducing poverty.i' If growth continues to
De strongly urban focused then rural poverty would remain relatively high. Given Cambodia's large rural
population and high level of rural poverty, these potential outcomes underline the importance of
irnplementing policies designed to alleviate rural poverty by promoting agricultural growth and improving
rural infrastructureand human capital.
39.
The major risk to this poverty reduction scenario is that, even with good policies, the private sector
may not fully respond to the improved environment and the opportunities for robust growth and markets.
The continuation of East Asia's recovery and growth in markets is another critical assumption. If the private
sector does not respond or if the regional and global economies experience a downturn, Cambodia may not
achieve a 6 percent GDP growth rate, and poverty reduction would be more modest. For example, if exports
were to grow at 5 percent and private investment increase to 13 percent of GDP by 2002, GDP growth would
be around 4 percent. In this case, per capita income would increase to US$340 in 2002 and to US$400 in
2005. The level of poverty would be reduced more modestly to 31 percent by 2002 and further to 26 percent
by 2005.

40.
In an accelerated reform scenario the government, in addition to the above, would make even
greater efforts to strengthen institutional capacity, improve governance and combat corruption. These
See Assessing Aid. World Bank Policy Research Report, 1998 on the correlationsbetween economic management and aid effectiveness.
See Annex A and Poverty Assessment (FY00). Poverty projections should be interpreted with caution, however. This analysis is based on national
poverty line estimated from the 1997 Socio-Economic Survey (about 50 cents a day) as compared to intemational poverty line of I dollar a day.
Poverty estimates here are consistent with those in the Poverty Assessment (FY00). The (interim) Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper that the
government will prepare in 2000 will contain a more detailed poverty analysis and will also incorporate the results of a new household income survey,
scheduled for completion in mid-2000.
For example, a 10 percent deterioration in inequality (measured in terms of the Gini coefficient) would increase the poverty level by 18percent.
4

- 15 additional efforts would further enhance aid effectiveness and the environment for private sector
development. Under this scenario, GDP could grow at 7 percent up to 2005 and 8 percent afterwards as the
dividends from these additional efforts were more fully realized over the longer term. Per capita income
could increase to US$370 by 2002 and further to US$470 by 2005. Poverty could be reduced to 25 percent
as early as 2002 and further to 15 percent by 2005.

Table 2: Full Reform Scenario: Macroeconomic Projections
1994

1995

1996
Actual

1997

1998

1999
Estimate

2000

2001
Projections

2002

Part A: MlainMacro Aggregates
GDP atmarket prices (0/0)
4.0
7.6
7.0
1.0
1.0
4.5
5.5
6.0
6.0
Gross domestic investment (%)
.
.
.
..
39.3
10.8
9.6
9.5
Exports (GNFS)(0)
.
-0.6
8.6
8.0
8.0
Imports (GNFS)(%)
14.1
9.0
5.0
6.1
Gross domestic investment
18.5
21.8
25.9
19.0
15.0
20.0
21.0
21.7
22.4
Foreign savings
13.0
16.8
14.6
6.8
8.3
12.8
13.7
12.8
12.5
Gross national savings
5.4
5.0
11.3
12.2
6.7
7.2
7.3
8.9
10.0
Gross domestic savings
4.4
4.3
9.9
10.3
5.5
6.8
7.6
9.8
11.2
Current account balance (% GDP)
-13.1
-16.8
-14.6
-6.8
-8.3
-12.8
-13.7
-12.8
-12.5
Part B: Government Finance Indicators (% of GDP)
Total revenues, of which
9.6
8.9
9.1
9.7
8.7
11.2
11.4
12.0
13.2
Tax revenues
5.9
6.2
6.5
6.6
6.3
8.0
8.4
8.8
9.7
Total expenditures,of which
16.5
16.7
16.3
13.9
14.8
14.5
15.7
17.6
18.5
Consumption
10.1
8.7
8.7
8.0
8.6
8.9
9.8
9.9
10.0
Deficit(-)/Surplus(+)
-6.8
-7.7
-7.2
-4.3
-5.8
-3.3
-4.4
-5.7
-5.3
Financing:
6.8
7.7
7.2
4.3
5.8
3.3
4.4
5.7
5.3
Part C: Debt & Liquidity Indicators
Total Debt Outstanding and Disbursed (DOD) and Total Debt Service (TDS)
DOD (US$ millions)
1,914.9 2,035.3 2,100.5 2,128.7
2,210.0
2,343.1
2,540.6
2,737.0
2,970.1
TDS (US$ millions)
1.9
6.4
9.8
10.0
12.9
*147.1
163.7
96.2
146.0
TDS/exports (XGS) ratio(%)
0.4
0.7
1.2
1.0
1.3
*14.4
14.4
7.5
10.4
Totalgrossreserves(monthsof
2.1
1.8
2.9
3.1
4.2
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
imports of goods & services)
*.Vote: TDS up to 1999is based on actual debt service payments. TDS after 1999 is based on currently-scheduled debt service (before any
rescheduling).

41.
In a limited reform scenario, however, the government would not have sufficient political will to
reinforce macroeconomic stability or to implement far-reaching structural and governance reform measures,
especially if they threaten vested interests. This lack of commitment would be reflected in stagnant budgetary
revenues and little reduction in defense and security expenditures. Moreover, the lack of political will to
implement credible reforms would also have an effect on the business climate and impede growth in
domestic, and particularly foreign, investment. As a result, GDP growth would stagnate at around 2 percent,
and inflationary pressures, stemming from central bank financing of the budget, would intensify and keep
inflation in the 20 percent range. It is also expected that, without major improvements in the country's
economic situation or in governance, several donors would reduce their assistance. Moreover, deterioration
in economic management and governance would further weaken aid effectiveness and private sector
development. In this case, per capita income would only improve slightly to $320 by 2002 and $340 by 2005.
Poverty would not decrease but would hover at around at 35 percent.
42.
External Environment. As Cambodia is a fairly open economy its medium-term growth will clearly
be influenced by exogenous factors, as indicated above. Exports account for about 30 percent of GDP and
have grown in US dollar terms, led by non-traditional goods, especially textiles. Medium-term projections
assume that the regional recovery will continue, which will have positive implications for Cambodia's FDI
and exports. Moreover, Cambodia's accession to ASEAN and accordingly the ASEAN Free Trade Area
(AFTA) offers both opportunities and challenges. Progressive liberalization under ASEAN should increase
the competitive pressures on the economy. While Cambodia would benefit from higher inter-regional trade
and investment flows, the government will have to develop alternative revenue sources to compensate for
prospective loss in customs revenue due to the government's plans to gradually reduce the tariff rate (an
average of 15 percent) to 0-5 percent in ten years. Progress is also being made towards Cambodia becoming
a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

- 1643.
External Debt. At the end of 1998,Cambodia's external public debt stood at $2.2 billion (including
short-term debt and IMF credits), equivalent to 77 percent of GDP and 207 percent of exports.16 Over 93
percent of this debt is on concessional terms. Some debt restructuring has occurred. In 1995, Cambodia
received highly concessionalterms ("Naples terms") on its convertible currency debt to Paris Club members,
as a result of which about $258 million of debt, including $110 million worth of interest arrears, were
consolidated and rescheduled. Cambodia has signed bilateral agreements with participating creditors, except
with the US with whom it is $6.7 million in principal arrears (negotiations were initiated in September 1999).
The government has initiated contact with the Russian authorities regarding Cambodia's debt to Russia,
$933.2 million stock of principal arrears, and dialogue is expected to continue within the framework of the
Paris Club. Assuming continued debt relief from bilateral creditors,'7 and continued availability of official
grants and concessional loans, Cambodia's debt service capacity will improve during the CAS period and
stay within sustainablethreshold levels. However, little information is available on domestic debt levels, so it
is less clear whether Cambodia's total public debt is fiscally sustainable (see Annex D).
III.

TACKLING THE AGENDA: A PARTNERSHIP APPROACH

44.
Aid Coordination and ManagementIssues. Cambodia's enormous developmentneeds, the scale of
its reforrn agenda, and the weakness of its public institutions all present a compelling case for taking a new
approach to development assistance. The new approach would entail far greater collaboration among
development partners to help the country realize its growth potential. Cambodia's institutional capacity to
deliver its development agenda is extremely weak. Stronger partnerships among donors, the private sector,
civil society, and the government will increase the chances that reforms and development programs will be
delivered, especially in rural areas. At the same time, the country's weak institutional capacity makes it
difficult for the government to assume the necessary leadership role. This is why the process of forging
partnerships in Cambodia must be carefully phased and tailored to the government's ability to deliver.
45.
Cambodia has a very active and committed donor and NGO community (see Table 3 for a
preliminary "mapping" of donor activities). However, the multiple activities of donors and NGOs place an
unsustainable management burden on the government and its limited institutional capacity. Both the
government and its development partners have consistently underlined the need for better coordination
among donors to deal with the many problems related to the plethora of projects being implemented
simultaneously. This may lead to a piecemeal approach to sectoral and institution-building issues, and the
proliferation of donor-supported project management units and of different administrative procedures (for
procurement and disbursement, for example) is inefficient and means that these large amounts of technical
assistance build very little real institutional capacity. The government has insufficient ownership of many
projects and programs, and large amounts of official development assistance flow outside the government
budgetary system. Also, the government has to deal with frequent official visits and consultations with
donors. Donors often fail to provide the government with timely and high-quality aid data(for example, on
commitments and disbursements), and their lack of accountability on project and programs, including
evaluations and audits of the impact of projects, can also be a problem.
46.
Several donors are now preparing country assistance strategies with broadly similar objectives of
reducing poverty. This provides an opportunity for greater collaboration if managed in a systematic way and
8 The prerequisite
could culminate in a paradigm shift in the relationship between all development partners1
is for the government to take more of a lead in aid management and coordination. This has serious capacity
staffing and budget implications for the government as well as broader consequences for the aid policies of
donors concerned. However, a move in this direction is inevitable, and the issue is how development
partners can best help the government to build its capacity to lead.
47.
The momentum towards a partnership approach already exists. At the February 1999 Consultative
Group (CG) meeting, a consensus was reached on the reform agenda and development priorities, leading to
6 Ratios of nominal total extemal debt to GDP and exports of goods and services.
'7 Including, foT example, comparable concessional treatment of extemal liabilities to Russia. Until the issue is resolved arrears continue to
accumulate.
IS Several donors have completed or are preparing new assistance strategies, including the ADB, UK, Netherlands, Sweden, and the EC. The focus of
all of these strategies is on poverty alleviation and increasing support for rural development. These have been shared or discussed in principle with
IDA staff, and further discussions are anticipated to identify complementaryactivities.

- 17a strong consensus on the need for collaboration around key reform themes. Subsequently, joint donor
working groups were formed around the thematic areas of fiscal reform, forestry, public administration
reform, demobilization, and poverty and the social sectors as well as an informal group on governance and
judicial reform. Government counterpart groups were also set up. These groups monitor progress in the
reforms and give in-depth attention to these reformnareas. The Prime Minister undertook to report to
development partners on the quarterly "joint stocktaking" meetings, convened under his chairmanship with
the participation of the entire Cabinet. Two such meetings have taken place in June and November 1999.The
whole process is still evolving, and the thematic groups are struggling to develop perfonnance indicators
and to integrate civil society into the partnership. Nevertheless, the basic collaborative infrastructure to
promote the partnership approach is in place.
48.
What is being suggested in this CAS is to build on this process by adopting a more programmatic
approach to development financing and support in light of shared objectives on policy reforms and poverty
reduction. The government and its development partners
would jointly prepare medium-term sector or cross-sectoral
Box7: SWAPsfor the LongTerm
straegis
buldig
onongingwork
and
expenditure
Prerequisites for Success:
strategies, building on ongoing
eThe governmentshould assume leadershipin
programs, which they would then jointly finance. In the formulating policy, defining an adequate
initial stage of this sector-wide approach (SWAP), the focus regulatory framework, and preparing mediumwould be on developing and reaching consensus on these term strategies and accompanying expenditure
strategies and expenditure programs. Donors could then frameworks.
either co-finance slices of the expenditure programs or * SWAP design should not be based on a
templatebut on appropriateneedsandconditions.
develop individual complementary projects covering The final product must be shared and agreed with
different aspects of the program. In this first phase, all stakeholders.
individual donor processes and procedures would still . Regional and district commitment and
prevail. In a later stage, donors would strive to harmonize ownership must be built or established for those
who will bear the main implementation
procurement, disbursement, and other processing procedures responsibility; communities will have an
so that the management and coordination burden on the increasingly important role, especially in health
government would be lessened. Ultimately, with greater and education.
government capacity, transparency, and accountability, it is . Maintaining a substantial donor field presence
envisaged that a stage will be reached when greater budget during the preparation and implementation stages
support from donors will become feasible.
is essential.
* A good governance environment has to be

49.
The SWAP could be tested in areas such as nurtured.
The benefits include more efficient development
infrastructure, health, education, and certain aspects of planning and implementation,
more effective use
governance. In these areas, there is a consensus among the of available resources, and a greater consensus
development partners that more urgently needs to be done to on how to achieve strategic goals.
increase poverty reduction, and several potentially The main risk is that preparing SWAPs is
complementary complementary
initiatives are already underway . The design ~~~~~~~~~~~~particularly
resource- and
for all concerned,
thetime-intensive
government. Reaching
a
of individual SWAPs will of course depend on the particular consensus may be difficult.
needs of the sector. A key aspect of the SWAP is the careful * A high degree of convergence of internal
specification of monitorable outcome indicators and processes, procedures, and schedules of donors is
intermediate progress milestones. While the government the ultimate goal. Given the internal and external
would take the lead in the overall SWAP, different donors constraints on funding agencies,this is often
would play a leading technical support role in each area. For SWAPs have only been used in a limited number
example, the World Health Organization (WHO) is already of countries so far, for example in Ghana where
playing such a role in the health sector, in which the ADB, progress is being made.
the UK, Germany, Japan, several UN agencies and IDA are also involved. There will be a need to maintain
flexibility on the issue of lead technical support for the SWAPs. However, partners in the lead technical
support role must be willing to devote the necessary resources and expertise to enable the government to
craft sector strategies and expenditure programs in a timely manner and share them with all partners.This
SWAP has been discussed with key stakeholders during consultations about the CAS, and the government
and most donors and NGOs fully support it. Discussions and consensus-building activities have been
initiated with donors on health and infrastructure, particularlywater supply/sanitation and roads. Consensus
building on legal/judicial reform and anti-corruption measures will be initiated shortly. The expected benefits
will be more efficient development planning and implementation a more effective use of development

- 17A Table3: PreliminaryMappingof DonorActivities(Ongoingand Planned)

Cacip m-buiding in Rogion CoPnna,nn.
S-b
hcGinonnonCapscitn
i. P-W nioTooo
TA
Do coping Cpoir~ in Aodit an
Fn-ontl -onnnn

IDA
G.,ornn--t&
ADS. C...ad,
A_oneaia
Germans
F ...
ID.A

Smn-tnu Adpninn

Fr-ro
InponhIDA

Tcnbhi.a
sisa.W-n torElo-nioj
do C,.,bc4gn
onPondP..onoaiir,
o
Phnnn, P,,,,s Po-nn ISnhno Aral~ tlnoor-loojo

C.joVeo F-onootboono

PPI' R-1n A E,,d

Cnodi.n TA C(ndi,

Arno-Conn
... I

-st'iI
ADDI
UNClE
UNWFP

C., nnnAoonooalsi
s-nogtnnig
gn. onnno aniw-nAlo
Sontlc ntnng InnonanI
lbnoobf Ad-,sn
Ro-daion]i
dtn EA, ] bSon] nf Ada,inonoar.-snn.
CnnnmnonoooA-1,ls saptp- tot Auin- Pl-npnlhO

~~~~~SQPpono

F-, sor
Japan

S.-sngCb.inolnatoI
otn OIbSatttn
oR-n iragnooonnfnd
"I
blinipaton
Snad
nnnppin.&

Sardc.
IDA

Rots] nato sah
uilon it- SoppIrPinot

ninoscoioP
in, NW P.,
nn
tnt -n

io,WlT-osctosaplr

Sionn Rna,

5nd,
.aa

Pfn-n, Ponhd,
doningo &

w-nonscoc-- Plii-.

RPI nnina

on-don-nn nodn irrialnu

Cc-onn F

npin, n- PPP- Ron]

-oonnk

& in,innialnfot,o-n~olo

~~~~~Dnlnil`nnnjotlbili-m
Fq-

APB
Jap-n, NL.

C-to>

SVpnnC.loPit.

or prnpa:arinf

A..~~~~i.~SVo,,n,

nTA

Onn-biLinain

Mng.a.

Dnf-s

WAit Ppc,o

ADD

Pnnan Rodngnnn

IL

Labnn-a,nnnao rid

Aaarsali

Rood and bindgnd,ig.

~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ADS~~

UNICEF.11.51C
U IFES
C-d.

EC

. .r
CaDaod-biotn
in
P
Soppot~~~~iton snall an-ndonsin

UNIFEM
bnnnnnslngo]nnnonncon.

Penni~~~~S.c*

Roci

AnD
_ _
SS _ __ _ _ _ _l

_ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ __i_

NC

o

A o n nr n

LCli

nto i n

SonnPnoonLWlf

FSHCR

NP
A.-jno
UND
G-1-

Inoni-ro

aniniin

EFD

IDA

ic.

-

opoano

LAcino-

tn1 ooroOnaooVno

EC
Cvci,

andRn]- floo

Lan

ii~~~~~ildi-g
1- t-4 -9-

rAo
D--

Ml

I.,id i-:

IINDI
F~~~~~~~~
U,,dSvpfiSS.

f Mig-

pplc

SC-J.'-

FA.

~

~ ~

FAO
Fnioooai
ADOPSIA

CapaniEnSciooinoootI.angneoo.
Cigoaci bA.dm.to fnSna etig-na..
toCAlDonlnnlneb
cnotann
esoinIC
END?.inooilia
anno Soolong ot fena nine
W,lnng an nopoong

MOCE
VNWFP

FAO

inAlOde he

Groaap
EC~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Jpa

adnpno

tootloponal

nicl

in o,nloSp- noion

r

_ __ _ __ _ _
olsgO

ao

ia

ninoIg

a

Dn nlpnn,o-daaFion--

-

UCKaul
H
ENID

-

aongWnni

dn-l]UNESCOI

,

ic,

..

,m

i

nanno-Sbolo

aoowatg

bi.i

LI.

Cd&

ECntongnan . lh,duhip donSheadtnne nnnoinna dtnlpnol.rronotl
SoponP.iaonnn
oflnatbfolnattooonrln-

HalIntoa
png
ConoolS i-jen

AD.
DAdDinoan

nLsan
in

R

-~A~plc

mppnnUnon.o
ontno-PIc
amin o
Tanginka
PSEll nmig.lWET]:.T
ii~h1-ci

SocalrordII.
-pho

D

Cdncalon

nntooaan
-V

-

Lndonbi

Dnelcnon

LIa.

asi Ud-aAn

ST
SocIL_Pn]

ri, i.filtmdoa
nd ltidNaid.

.ngin
SltandnsnSAo:

SIVIIS

Oal-

fc
mAl]oals
a

aanoon

nlanpnoigSoo':otbooSpntOosto

M."on-n
WHO~~~bon
FlaoWi
NA niDS

HV/ID

IMCPa;UNC
ASIFncia
Unodre]
ND
?
ranc

Enildngnoponni.o
adnfc NWetoit
nonnnnlabfono
nnnEnoina
n
iocolSotRnaa
Li
npnnosInnainfCEAatiramooddntantonlo
Cilolinno onndi Hptogasnn
fg
..

105.gTh.
EC,DAsinD

MoRcl-

iooC-bi

amndim bADana.

P

-

-

.

1,

F-.tStngH

os

od

adSAnnLa

d

-

WI.

pitk

eaing

F-I Cfi4UNESCO.iFenSe.-Coltol
1onraJAIt. F-LL
has bescmie

_ _ _ __-_

loa.
rciVIAIgDS
TAbaao
.
icaII ononT.flng,ol
fIonnDnlpnoIn
Bs-in
al Soo local LOW:
c~,i"'~E.l~lge
mitf.
E,,
ol: w, dooi.ie E
-aAl1rp.
CIIS7
Soppo to nloon
otn
andpF-iiona]dtnoinn
TiSWAP Pnaaeao
naldon
iSVAID ptingic
Wdnlo

END

CCb

UK
I lD edIA
ENo-e thi tal

ADDn:

annoa

~~~~~I-Pa,inipatodp
otaagooo
wrcno

i-

ENHCR

AgnnhniginontSondc-no.
ScW
d dnnlp-nt
,
Ap~~~~~Intgalnd
frd m..Soric.nI:o
ins]AdC-ldpti,
inp.-ap-i.SEC.r
IDA
Ageoobon Pttaninln
ltnpon etrano Socialood tEC
V lldo
Sal 1 tno
Cpnnin

EC

arld-

idognoco
-

prIOASEAN
Co
rnoilbnd.Nna-lionalo,ln]ng

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~~

END?.FAD CARANtDrSoila
nono]danoloponad in poloCanrbodin:
UNIEF
ornoato
onor an oo] Dnloonno
CASI:UNIEF
ENWF
bamorndntndaifonncooen
nd iEoblitt]oo
caen nt fnfod

Ceesia

_ __ _ _ _ _ __T_

panilr-b.on.n.
on-ilnoloTn ancdiS0,0C0 otfoon
ii,S.lig
CM-nonanil tablin Snnnn plnceg.
naC entlIOolooan

Cognooldio Scod inis
LWAnosnniSo
-ng,nnnninlgoiADibasicbWsS
Eaman
TAgnolIre U-onnoon
Sg loon--W qi-.AC
pil-a
de opn ptgnoi- n SACaendo:
L-d~onbona Wacnio tn] ns
L"ne pa oonn
OnistN. L,dpnOWaeinerhOP leg pnF-il
gbnrto
oegntaonaan no] ninioo
ea]Annoloonno
nnngnnoin
aginobonl
anedn

A11dS

pli.nfnrS'IO)

~Booton
eadlloo
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~pnnsantaboildici
1n

adloUEC

~

mi]it.nin

PSUCpnrn-noonTann.i
-cicnotnat-oltg
h ,6

"i

SiPpo Eon
landAgf. f0 odgn,

o

of ana-11lninnisn

-Top-osnnn:,
dnn

Edooal,innSnOo Anion.Loan f.inonatITrioo

ED
JMrnpIAaTl.

dicuion..

onononol a7 aoo-baoldont

Lo-n Capacinr-BooldingalosdinoMiw

Capaot-boiltn
Rpnoa
in.
aid ad,
cli,pC,anAgoRAlSnodRn.nnPa.Cwo
Sppnali
i-s1ain-s.
(;~FIS
.Smaedosr
;,cionooocoicasonE
Caairbitgtndo
.iic
fPooigloinonnnnaa
n oan

I

idcMl

TeononaDq
lippnFonololotinoopanpnoloiooloF-fabjo

Ltooira

UNIO.

ADS

Cp]aoic Sidlog Cinandnangno
Enlini-ir
Mi
Sauna land
W..n ons: WV - ATn
UN'APP
onland
Dala
noons
iotaandfondannul,>

UJNICSpEF.,

FAD

O n tr n

~

ATloln
.

tAO

Lao.

HTnocigonngian on c
d-ion
i
U,
f.,
Ln,al Ptnnoi- ot~cbildro Sna Scorn] En]illo
wMnnoc fWtioaoVona
laioooonl
boildingaFn...bam,
cfi.~~~nWoioEnaodff&
In
tngna
Pnonn
nbS o]tro

AEC
UICEF

trds

U=Fd

TA CongA ID - La o
CR

naon

ondnelprnon:sA

lnnpnnn-,

lionhdinig fond Sc -nnod dotnlprn

LibosBorOn,,
DX.
otoonan
Na edeo
nglos and Onnooonao
ItO Lngal (nanonnonh

ID A
us

insoTx. Road N-onS
ndbilitaion

otVonolinl

Cre

,ctcitesffp-)s
cric

tm
ar

oo

lae'paes
io.\CSICtnb

adpbilyaalbeifrmto,admyb
documened is

tableOMtthis Paat

Icmlt
ls-

4:

h

slruinI

loa an gbda
llrnlonttNOipei

fSnlf
F

o lutatv

upssE

- 18-

resources within a framework of shared goals, and a greater impact in terms of reducing poverty. SWAPs
will be difficult to implement, however, because of the extent of commitment needed and the time and
resources required for preparation (see Box 7). Given the hard work needed to develop shared expenditure
programs and the even greater difficulty of harmonizing procedures, it is likely that only the initial stages of
the SWAP-strategies, expenditure programs, and complementary donor projects-will be developed during
this CAS period.
PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
50.
The Bank Group's assistance program for Cambodia is based on the development needs identified in
analytical work, lessons learned from previous experience in country, consultations with stakeholders and an
assessment of the Bank Group's comparative advantage within the partnership framework outlined above.
LESSONS FROMEXPERIENCE

51.
This is the third CAS. IDA's previous assistance in the period 1992-99 (following the resumption of
Cambodia's borrowing after the conclusion of the Paris Peace Accords in 1991) began as emergency
reconstruction/rehabilitation and support for
macroeconomic stabilization and management.
Box8: OEDRecommendations
In the post-conflict period, it evolved towards a
The Cambodia Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE).
broader program aimed at alleviating poverty completed in June 1999, covered the period 1992-99 and,
and upgrading the country's infrastructure. The hence,thefirst two assistancestrategies(1995,1997).The CAE
concluded that IDA's assistance objectives were relevant and its
second GAS (January 1997) built on these services and mix of instruments consistent with achieving them.
earlier efforts by supporting macroeconomic However, project design was in some cases too complex, and
stability and economic reforms, enhancing rural implementation capacity stretched. Several projects suffered
development
and
natural
resources from implementationdelays because of political events and weak
domestic capacity. The outcome of IDA's involvement in this
management, supporting critical infrastructure period was thus only marginally satisfactory.
rehabilitation, improving human resources to
reduce poverty, and strengthening institutional hould continue to focus on poverty alleviation. The key to
capacity. In practice, the political events of July reducing poverty in Cambodia is macroeconomic stability and
1997 and the shock of the regional financial growth. IDA's ongoing efforts to support tax reform and
crisis triggered a shift to the low-case scenario improved tax administration are a high priority. Together with a
and delayed subsequent project preparation and gradual reduction in military spending and in the size of the civil
The 1997 GAS had anticipated service,this could generatesavingsthat could be allocatedto
implementation.
implementation,
The 1997 CAS had antlelpated agricultural,rural, and social development.For sustained growth,
these risks. In a recent Country Assistance IDA could support programs to stimulate higher productivity in
Evaluation the Bank Group's Operations and agriculture (especially rice and rubber) and encourage rural
Evaluations Department (OED) rated IDA's enterprises. Women should be targeted wherever possible. IDA
involvement during 1992-99 as marginally could also help the govermment to create a better business
involvementduring
1992-99
as marginally
environment conducive to private sector investment and
satisfactory. In response to the OED's development and help to rehabilitate legal institutions and
recommendations(see Box 8), the CAS focuses promote legal reform. As the policy dialogue has become more
more strongly on rural poverty alleviation, complex, the portfolio has grown, and donor coordination has
governance and institutional development. The become increasingly important, there is a need for a full-fledged
country

office will

also be expanded.

In

WorldBankofficein the field.

addition, several principal lessons have been learned. First is the need to recognize that governance issues
and weak institutional capacity would complicate project implementation and the need to pay closer
attention to project financial management issues. The second lesson is the need to work more closely with
other donors and to strengthen IDA's presence on the ground. In the case of technical assistance, greater
emphasis should be placed on the transfer of knowledge to local counterparts to reduce dependence on
external consultants. A further lesson was the need for closer integration within the Bank Group, among
IDA, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral Investment and Guarantees Agency
(MIGA), the Foreign Investment Advisory Services (FIAS) within the IFC, and the World Bank Institute
(WBI). The IFC's presence in Cambodia has been relatively limited but is expected to increase now that the
political situation and economy are stabilizing. This CAS has, therefore, been prepared jointly withthe IFC

-

19 -

so that IDA's policy and capacity-building work effectively complements the IFC's and MIGA's direct
support for the private sector and investment promotion.
52.
Portfolio Implementation Experience. IDA has 10 ongoing projects, representing a total commitment
of $246 million, of which $93 million was disbursed by end-1999. The portfolio is largely in good standing,
and disbursements have been steady. While, at present, we see no evidence of corruption as such in the
portfolio; however there are clearly issues with regard to the financial management of some projects (see
Annex F) and the management of consultants in one particular project. One issue is the lack of technical
capacity in the government in the areas of accounting, reporting, and auditing; another is the governance
environment, which sometimes makes it difficult to ensure accountability at the individual project level. A
particular concern is the need for the govemment to develop a more systematic approach to and capacity for
evaluating the technical competence and appointment of auditors working on IDA projects. At the macro level,
there is a need for more effective budgeting and monitoring of development expenditures. There is also a need
for better coordination among implementing agencies, including streamlining of project management units,
and for better management of project-financed consultants. In response to these concerns, IDA will prepare
Country Portfolio Performance Reviews (CPPR) and accompanying action plans annually, beginning in June
2000, Country Procurement Assessment Reports (CPAR) with a particular emphasis on consultant selection
every two years, and Financial Assessments annually. In addition, resources will be mobilized to upgrade the
skills of local counterpart staff in financial management and accounting and to develop this capacity at the
field office. With the new SWAP, it is expected that future portfolio reviews could be a joint exerciseamong
several development partners.
53.
Further lessons were derived from a Client Feedback Survey organized in August-September 1999
(see Annex G). The principal findings of this survey were that the Bank Group ranked highly in several areas:
(i) taking account of the country's realities (in project design); (ii) technical competence; (iii) helping to bring
about economic growth; (iv) strengtheningthe knowledge and skills of individuals; (v) the reliability of staff in
delivering on commitments; (vi) helping to ensure that project's benefitsjustify the cost to the country (during
the project design phase); and (vii) disbursing funds in a timely manner (during the project's implementation).
Respondents report that the Bank Group is most effective, in general, at its role in donor coordination. This is
particularly encouraging at a time when the Bank Group is trying hard to strengthen partnerships and improve
outreach on the ground. Key areas for improvement were in: (i) building capacity at the community level
(which was ranked lowest in the survey); (ii) strengthening local training and research organizations; (iii)
helping to strengthenthe private sector; and (iv) helping to strengthen/maintain sound macro and trade policies
The survey also indicates that the Bank Group has not done as well as the respondents would like it to at
communicating with local constituencies.
CAS CONSULTATIONS

54.
In preparation for the CAS, the country team carried out the most extensive in-country consultations to
date (details are given in Annex G). A CAS discussion document and supplemental note on partnerships,
including aid coordination were translated into Khmer and widely distributed. The team met with the Prime
Minister and the Chairman of the National Assembly, representatives ofthe govemment, the opposition Sam
Rainsy Party, the National Assembly and Senate, private businesses, civil society including local and
international NGOs in Phnom Penh, and the provincial capital of Battambang, and with the donor community.
Poor communities were also consulted in focus group discussions (see Annex C). The aim of these
discussions was to seek the views of the major actors in Cambodia on the country's evolving development
needs and priorities and to elicit feedback on how the Bank Group and other partners could help to meet some
of these priority needs more effectively than previously through a collaborative approach. An equally
important objective of the consultations was to engage stakeholders-some of whom were meetingwith Bank
Group representativesfor the first time-in open dialogue, tap into their knowledge base and to increase their
awareness of Bank Group activities in the country.2 0
55.
The CAS consultations were lively and highly interactive (see Box 9). They provided valuable
feedback on development priorities and strategic responses, on the feasibility of the proposed partnership
'9 Stakeholder consultations have been used successfilly in one IDA project, the Social Fund II (FY99) project. IDA intends to use this tool whenever
feasible and appropriate.

- 20approach and the SWAPs, and on ways to monitor development outcomes. A consistent message from all
stakeholders, but particularly from legislators, civil society, and the private sector, was that the Bank Group
should disseminate information about its own programs more systematically and establish a mechanism for
regular dialogue with stakeholders. Through regular consultations, stakeholders should become more actively
involved in monitoring both the national reform program and progress in IDA's own operations, particularly
at the local level. A further strong message was that the Bank Group should expand its presence on the ground.
Box 9: CAS Consultations: Key Messages to the Bank Group from Stakeholders
* Development Priorities.The overriding priority in Cambodia is the need for good governance. Poverty cannot be reduced without
it. Laws and regulations must be transparent and consistently implemented; public institutions must be responsible and accountable.
The greatest development needs are in rural areas, many of which have only recently become accessible after years of conflict, and
financial assistance must focus on these areas where the majority of the poor live, rather than in the capital, as has so far largely been
the case.
* The strategic focus of the CAS should, therefore, be on supporting initiatives that promote good governance, particularly the rule of
law, a key element being establishment of a fair and transparent system for land allocation and management. The Bank Group should
also support the developmentof rural infrastructure to increase access to services and promote economic opportunities and continue to
support the provision of basic health and education services. In addition to basic education, the Bank Group should also consider the
need for developing leadership skills and higher education, particularly as Cambodia lost a generation of educated people during the
Khmer Rouge period in the 1970s, the impact of which is still being felt in the country's institutions. The Bank Group should support
the private sector primarily by promoting good governance. There was widespread support, particularly among civil society and to
some extent in the private sector and the govemment, for a more proactive approach to gender issues in development, particularly in
health and education. The CAS should adopt cross-sectoral approaches wherever feasible.
*Partnerships, including SWAPS. The stronger partnership approach, including the testing of SWAPs was universally endorsed,
Govemment officials in particular urged donors to be more disciplined and work together more systematically. This would also
facilitate monitoring. The partnership approach would enhance the govemment's sense of ownership of the development process, but
the authorities would require a great deal of institutional support. Donors advised that SWAPs needed to be better defined, particularly
in the area of govemance, but were committed to the process. In developing the SWAPs and other partnerships, the Bank Group should
also draw on lessons leamed from existing models, particularly of decentralizedactivities.
'Monitoring outcomes. There was general agreement on the importance of monitoring country and donor performance, but targets had
to be realistic. Global development goals could point the way to the kinds of indicators that should be considered. The CAS should set
clear indicators,particularly reiated to the Bank Group's own program. Civil society could help to monitor these indicators, particularly
at the local level. Such indicators should feed into or provide a basis for indicators being developed by donor and government working
groups on the nationalreform program.
'Additional issues. Legislators reminded the country team that the country's constitution requires that any IDA credits have to be
approved and ratified by the National Assembly. Several stakeholders expressed concems over Cambodia's capacity to repay loans,
whether these loans are being utilized effectively and appropriately, and how the Bank Group monitors its operations.

56.
The strategic thrust of the CAS and the proposed delivery mechanisms have been reworked to reflect
these recommendations.In particular, the country team undertook to disseminate information about activities
more widely through the World Bank Office in Phnom Penh and also noted that the final CAS would be
translated into Khmer and publicly disseminated. In some cases, it has not been possible to accommodate
specific requests for assistance because these fall outside the Bank Group's competence or comparative
advantage. In other cases, the recommendations were of a political nature and needed to be directed at the
government rather than the Bank Group. There was a strong demand for the Bank Group to be a key player in
almost all areas. However, while the Bank Group could try to respond to this demand in the short term, the
country team reminded stakeholders that a strong partnership approach would necessarily mean that others
would provide leading technical support in some areas, leaving the Bank Group to focus increasingly on
certain areas of comparative advantage.
C. CAS OBJECTIVES AND APPROACH

57.
The main objective of the CAS is to assist Cambodia to build the foundations for sustainable
development and poverty reduction for the medium to long term. This objective is wholly consistent with
the government's priorities as articulated above. Building these foundations entails: (i) supporting good
governance, such as legal and judicial reform, public sector reform including civil service restructuring, and
military demobilization; (ii) buildingphysical infrastructure, particularly roads, water supply, and electricity
in rural and provincial areas to increase access to services and productive activities; (iii) rebuilding human
capital by increasing access to and the quality of healthcare services and investing in education and skills
development that will contribute to building institutional capacity and good governance, as well as to better
health outcomes, income-generation,and competitiveness;and (iv) facilitating private sector development in
traditional and non-traditional sectors, including supporting rural income-generation, through a combination

- 21 of policy work, encouraging regular constructive dialogue between the government and the private sector, and
providing direct support to business ventures. All interventions will focus as much as possible on rural areas
where the majority of the poor, and indeed the majority of the population live, and orn increasing access and
opportunities for women-particularly
in education. The Bank Group will also pay particular attention to
including disadvantaged groups and to preserving and restoring the country's naturai resources and cultural
heritage as potential bases for growth. Capacity-building will be an integral part of all interventions. Including
the current fiscal year, this CAS envisages a four-year program of support, FYO&-(3, to coincide with the
present administration's term in office.
58.
The assistance program will be designed and implemented in a collaborative mnannerwith the Bank's
development partners as discussed earlier. IDA will support SWAPs in three pricrity areas. In the area of
governance the Bank's discussions with other partners on the governance SWAPs are still in the early stages,
so the first priority is to build a consensus. SWAPs on legal/judicial reform and anti-c-rruption measures will
be given first attention. In the area of infrastructure, discussions on road transport have begun. This is the
area where short-term interventions will have the most immediate impact on rural poverty. We would aim to
extend the SWAP to other infrastructure areas, including water supply/sanitation and electricity where the
government is developing sector strategies; expenditure programs will need to be -formulated. These sectoral
efforts could also be built up into a cross-sectoral SWAP to deliver rural and provincial infrastructure
investments. A key aspect of infrastructure development will be the effective involvement of the private
sector, which is already present in many provincial towns. In the third area, health. as indicated earlier, the
WHO has been helping the government to formulate a SWAP, and the government is currently preparing an
expenditure program. In education, ADB is expected to take the lead in assisting the govemment to develop
a SWAP in which IDA could participate as a partner. In areas where SWAPs are not proposed in the first
instance but are nonetheless important, IDA will focus on strengthening coordination with others in support of
the government's program.
59.
The Bank Group expects to maintain a presence in several sectors for a nunmber of reasons, although
the nature and depth of involvement will be selective. First, Cambodia is a post-conflict country with
enormous needs. Second, while many donors and NGOs are present, coordination needs to improve
considerably, as discussed above. There is a strong demand from the government and several stakeholders for
IDA to play a coordinating and catalytic role in the short term, as the government's aid management and
developing planning capacity evolves. The first stages of the CAS program focus on developing the processes
for partnership, on building knowledge and the policy framework, and strengthening the capacity of the
government's institutions so that they can be more effective in managing their oun reform program, and
raising the revenues that will wean Cambodia away from its dependence on foreigrn aid.? Further, through
the proposed SAC, IDA intends to keep track of overall expenditure patterns and sec,oral budget allocations.
However, the CAS takes due account of the activities and financial commitments of other development
partners. The scope and degree of Bank Group involvement will vary by sector, especially where other
partners are taking the lead in assisting the government with SWAP preparation. The focus of IDA lending
will be on rural infrastructure and rural development, health and education, with some fast-disbursing support
for public sector/expenditure reform. More limited lending is envisaged in the areas of governance-such
as
anticorruption and legal/judicial reform-and capacity-building. Analytical work -vnll be oriented primarily
towards the SWAPs and governance issues. We will also assist the government in preparing its national
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), in collaboration with the IMF, beginning wvithan interim paper in
FYO1, and with related analytical work. As donor coordination and the Governmen.'s capacity to manage aid
improves, and the impact of policy reforms is felt, the Bank Group's involvement will become much more
selective, so that in the next CAS, our resources can be concentrated more narrow.lIy, but within a coherent
overall strategic context.
60.

In view of this coordinating role, a key

element of our strategic apprcach is to substantially

upgrade the Bank Group's field presence in response to a strong demand from the government and other
7
stakeholders and given the staffing and resource requirements for developing the SIA.
'APs,the need to enhance
collaboration with development partners, and the need to disseminate information about Bank Group activities
more effectively. The scale and depth of the reform agenda and the importance of closer monitoring of the
country's performance also means that the Bank has to have a stronger local presence so it is better positioned
to provide policy advice at short notice. Until now, IDA has been represented in Carmbodiaby a liaison office

- 22 -

located in the UNDP offices, comprising one senior expatriate consultant and two local clerical staff. The
functions of the liaison office have been to provide a channel for limited policy discussions with the
government, to coordinate with donors, and to give some modest assistance to visiting missions. This
arrangement reflected the small initial size of the assistance program and the available administrative budget,
and the uncertain political environment after 1997 also precluded expanding the office. However, it is clear
that in the current environment, and in light of Cambodia's emerging needs and the proposed partnership
approach, a one-person liaison office is inadequately equipped for conducting deeper policy dialogue.
overseeing IDA's portfolio or building partnerships. The IFC is currently represented in Phnom Penh by the
staff of its Mekong Project Development Facility (MPDF) office, overseen by the IFC's regional office in
Hanoi, Vietnam. The demand for the IFC's services is expected to increase rapidly.
61.
In this context, the Bank Group intends to open a full-fledged World Bank Office in FY01. The
principal functions of this office will be providing policy advice, in particular on demobilization where IDA
has been taking a leading advisory role (see below), coordinating those SWAPs in which IDA proposes to act
as the lead technical donor, and improving outreach to other development partners, including NGOs and the
private sector. The office would also assume greater responsibility for portfolio monitoring; over time, project
supervision would be progressively decentralized. In addition, the office would house a resource center to
improve disseminationof information about Bank Group activities and country developments, and possibly a
distance learning facility in association with WBI and a local training institution. For the IFC, the office will
provide a base for increasing its dialogue with and support to the private sector.
D. PROPOSEDCAS PROGRAMANDACTIVITIES

62.
The base case program incorporates assistance provided by IDA and the IFC (including the Mekong
Project Development Facility, MPDF), with the involvement of FIAS, MIGA (which Cambodia joined in
December 1999), and WBI. In areas where a SWAP is being developed, the exact nature and volume of
support will not be known until the sector strategies and expenditure programs have been completed and
agreed. IDA will maintain flexibility on the issue of lead technical donor support for SWAPs where other
partners feel better positioned to provide this support and coordination function.Therefore, indicative sectoral
or cross-sectoral support has been included, through a combination of analytical and advisory services,
investment operations, learning and innovation loans (LILs), fast-disbursing loans, and capacitybuilding. The
proposed program is summarized as follows.
63. .
Building Good Governance. During the CAS period, the Bank Group will:
* Support the government's macroeconomic and public sector reform agenda. IDA has prepared a
Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC) that, together with thePRGF, will provide fast-disbursing support for

the government's priority governance and fiscal reforms as outlined in Part III above. The SAC supports
measures that will enhance governancethrough better revenue mobilization and expenditure management,
viable and transparent forestry management, pilot military demobilization, and a civil service census and
functional analysis. The SAC will also supportthe government's actions to increase budget allocations to
priority sectors under its priority action program. IDA is helping the authorities to implement these
measures through an ongoing Technical Assistance Credit (FY95). A follow-up Economic Capacity-

Building Operation (FY01) is also proposed to strengthen technical skills in the critical areas of
macroeconomic, public sector, and public expenditure management. Building on the SAC, as well as an
earlier Public Expenditure Review (FY99) and Poverty Assessment (FY00), IDA will continue to work

closely with the IMF on fiscal reform and macroeconomic management to support the government in
preparing a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) with active civil society participation. IDA will

assist the government in preparing an interim PRSPin FY01, moving to a full-fledged PRSP in FY02. The
PRSP, together with a Public InstitutionalReview (FY01) could also provide the basis for a follow-up fastdisbursing operation or Public Sector Reform Credit (FY02), which would help streamline the public
sector and deepen reforms in public administration and public expenditure management. To complement
this work and to help the government to monitor outcomes, a Participatory Poverty Assessment (FY02)
will also be prepared, and IDA will help the government by Developing Capacity in Poverty Monitoring

(FY01, 02).

20

This capacity-buildingapproach will also help the authoritiestake over management of the Consultative Group (CG).

- 23 -

Collaborate with ADB, Australia, and Canada in the area of anti-corruption. IDA will complete a
Diagnostic Analysis of Governance and Corruption (FY00), financed by the Institutional Development
Fund (IDF). This is a survey of private businesses, public officials, and private citizens that will provide
quantitative and qualitative data on the extent and impact of corruption. Based on this, IDA willhelp the
government to prepare a GovernanceAction Plan that incorporates the findings of the diagnostic analysis
as well as the results of other ongoing donor-financed work in this area. The Action Plan will set out the
government's strategy for tackling corruption and indicate areas for further donor and NGO assistance
with the involvement of civil society. It should serve as the lynchpin for a SWAP-type arrangement around
which other donors would become involved. It is expected that the draft Action Plan will be discussed at
the forthcoming CG meeting in spring 2000. IDA will also provide Capacity-Building for Public Sector
Accounting and Auditing (FY00), an IDF grant, to increase the transparency of the government's
financial management.
* Assist the government to develop a SWAP in legal/judicial reform. Three main government institutions
are involved in this area: the Council of Jurists, the Ministry of Justice, and the Ministry of the Interior.
The National Assembly is responsible for enacting laws, once passed through the Council of Ministers.
Several other ministries and agencies are also able to draft and issue legal decrees and circulars, notably
the Ministry of Economy and Finance and the Ministry of Commerce. The ADB, UN agencies, and several
bilateral donors and NGOs are supporting the government in various aspects legal/judicial reform. IDA is
also financing the preparation of a legal diagnostic study by the Council of Jurists andthe publication of
legal texts and has assisted the Ministry of Commerce in drafting the Comrnercial Code (TA Credit,
FY95). All of these activities could be better coordinated. The objectives of the SWAP would, therefore,
include harmonizing the legal framework and making it more consistent, disseminating laws more
widely and effectively, and enhancing the credibility of the country's legal institutions. To develop the
SWAP, the Bank Group proposes that the government establish an inter-agency steering committee with
working groups on priority reform areas. The government has already indicated that it would set up a
special legal reform council as a national coordinating body. IDA will help the government to prepare a
Legal Needs Assessment (FY01) in partnership with other donors which could form the basis for a sector
strategy and expenditure program. The Bank Group's specific value-added within the SWAP could be in
the continued development of financial and commercial legislation, commercial arbitration, and the
dissemination of informationthrough a Legal Reform Operation (FY02).
* Work closely with other partners to develop a more effective and transparent framework for land
management and administration,a key element of good governance and equitable growth. This entails
preparing a Land Issues and Policy Note (FY00) that will synthesize the experiences of other partners in
this area, including the ADB's work on the land law. IDA will also support the completion of the largescale study of the social and economic impacts of trends in land use (such as land concessions, land
loss/sales by the rural poor, land accumulation, and land-related gender concerns)that has been initiated
by Oxfam GB (Cambodia Land Study Project) with the support of the UK government. This analytical
work will define the parameters of a Land Management Operation (FY0 1) whose primary purpose will be
to coordinate numerous ongoing land-related programs, including mapping, surveying, and planning. This
operation could also include a land titling component in pilot areas that would specifically benefit poor
communities and disadvantaged groups.
64.
Building Physical Infrastructure. The Bank Group has several ongoing operations in infrastructure,
including the Social Fund 11(FY99) that supports community-based small-scale infrastructure development, in
addition to larger sectoral investment loans. Over the CAS period, we will:
* Prepare a Country Framework Report for PPI (FY00), through the Private Participation in Infrastructure
Facility (PPIAF), in view of the importance of involving the private sector in this area. IDA and the IFC
could also assist with enhancing the regulatory framework for PPI.
* Support the government in fornulating an Infrastructure SWAP, beginning with roads. ADB has
indicated that it wishes to provide lead technical support in the road sub-sector. Several other donors are
also involved. The ADB, Japan, and IDA are supporting primary road rehabilitation. The ILO, Sweden,
Japan, and the UN World Food Programme (UNWFP) have been supporting labor-intensive programs to
upgrade rural roads and generate rural employment. ILO and Sweden have helped to develop rural road
policies. Australia, France, Germany,and New Zealand are also active. IDA is currently financing a Road
Rehabilitation Project (FY99) to upgrade National Route 6 to major tourist sites, in supporting the local

- 24 construction industry (with the ILO), and in restoring ten culturally significant bridges. There is a
consensus on the need to tighten coordination within the government and among donors to build and link
primary, secondary, and rural roads, to develop better and financially sustainable maintenance systems, to
involve the local construction industry, and to establish traffic management, safety standards, and
environmental standards. IDA's value-added could be in secondary and rural road construction and in the
development of road financing mechanisms. A Rural and Provincial Infrastructure Operation that targets
secondary and rural roads is scheduled for FY02. This operation could be used to provide short-term
employment and to develop the skills of demobilized soldiers.

Table 4: Proposed CAS Program at a Glance
FYOO

___

YO1

__FI

FY02

FY93

1. ANALYTICAL
ANDADVISORY
SERVICES

a.AnalyticalWork
* Governance Analysis & Action
Plan* (IDF);
* Land Issues and Policy Note;
Supportfor Land Study/Analysis
* Water and Sanitation Policy; Rural
Electrification Study (financed under
ongoing projects)*

* Support for preparation of Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)
* Public Institutional Review
* Legal Needs Assessment*
* Healthcare Financing Study*
* Transport Strategy (project-financed)*
* Country FrameworkReport on Private
Participation in infrastructure & social
services*

* Support for PRSP preparation
* Participatory Poverty
Assessment
* Rural Development Strategy*

* IFC,FIAS, MIGA TA (demand driven)
* Private Sector Forum (IFC, IDA)
* WBI Activities (demand driven)

* Capacity-building for Poverty
Monitoring
* Private Sector Forum (IFC,
IDA)
* IFC, FIAS, MIGA TA
(demand driven)
* WBI (demand driven)

* IFC, FIAS, MIGA TA
(demand driven)
* Private Sector Forum (IFC,
IDA)
* WBI (demand driven)

* Health Sector Support Operation*
* Economic Capacity-Building Operation
* Land ManagementOperation
* Rural Electrificationand Transmission
Project*
* IFC Investments (demand driven)

* Public Sector Reform
Operation
* Rural/Provincial
Infrastructure Operation*
* Legal Reform Operation*
* Higher Education/
Leadership Development*
* IFC Investments (demand

* Basic Education Quality
Improvement Operation*
* Rural Development
Operation*
* Cultural Heritage LIL
* IFC Investments (demand
driven)

* Support for PRSP
preparation

l

b. Capacity-building
* Design of DemobilizationPilot
Prograrn
* Public Sector Accounting &
Auditing (IDF)
* SocioeconomicSurvey
* Private Sector Forum (IFC, IDA)
* IFC: TA for small businesses;
FIAS: Investment/FDI; MIGA:
Investment Promotion
* WBI Activities(demand driven)
2. LENDING
* Structural Adjustment Credit
(SAC)
* Forestry LIL
* Biodiversity LIL
* Education Quality LIL (approved)
* IFC Investments (demand driven)

._________________________
_______________________________
______________________driven)
* Directly related to SWAP

*

A second stage of infrastructure support would focus on water supply and sanitation, building on the
government's recently completed strategy for expanding coverage of safe water supply and sanitation
services based on public-private partnerships in urban and rural areas. The govemment is coordinating its
policy reforms through an inter-ministerial Coordinating Committee for Water Supply and Sanitation
Policy Development. In addition to IDA, the ADB, Australia, France, Japan, Sweden, and numerous
NGOs are supporting these policy reforms. IDA could play a lead technical role in this sub-sector. Under
the Urban Water Supply Project (FY98), IDA has financed sector policy development, including analysis
of the current situation and how incentives can best be aligned to meet the consumer demand for services,
and the training of key officials in tariff/regulatory reforms. The WBI has financed three seminars to
promote policy reforms and PPI. The Bank Group is also currently assisting the govemment in aligning
rural water supply programs with globally accepted best practices, while coordinating the initiatives of
bilateral donors and NGOs in rural areas. The investment programs of the ADB and IDA have been
complementary both in the rehabilitation of the Phnom Penh water utility and in provincial towns of the
country. Legislation on an appropriate water sector regulatory framework and water tariff reforms are
expected in mid-2000. The government intends to identify some water utilities whose financing and
operations could be put out to tender to private operators. A national expenditure for rural water supply
and peri-urban areas could be developed by the end of 2000. IDA aims to continue supporting the

- 25 development of sectoral regulatory institutions, leveraging private investments into the sector (with IFC
involvement wherever feasible), and promoting small-scale private/community-based operationsin rural
and peri-urban areas. The design process will be worked out collaboratively under the overall guidance of
the Coordinating Committee with the participation of the ADB and major bilateral donors;
Support capacity building for the Energy Authority, covering its commercialization and eventual
privatization, tariffs, negotiations with potential foreign strategic partners (for example,for Electricite de
Cambodge, EDC22 ), prepare a rural electrification strategy (financed under the ongoing Phnom Penh
Power Supply Project, FY96). IDA could eventually play a lead technical role in this sub-sector also. A
Rural Electrification and Transmission Project (FY01) was planned in the previous CAS and is nowbeing
prepared. This project will continue IDA support for the government's sector reform efforts initiated under
the FY96 project, provide grid and off-grid supplies to rural areas and remove a major bottleneck through
a transmission line to the south, with a possible extension. The IFC will also support private investment in
energy (see below).
65.
With regard to human and social capital development, IDA will:
* Support a Health SWAP. As indicated earlier, the Ministry of Health has prepared a broad strategy with
the assistance of the WHO. Priorities include developing a district-based healthcare delivery system, and
increasing the supply of essential drugs. The ADB, UN agencies and numerous bilateral donors are
involved in various aspects of health reform and health infrastructure. Several donors, particularly UN
agencies, are supporting the HIV/AIDS program through UNAIDS. IDA is currently implementing a
Disease Control and Health Development Project (FY97) that is upgrading basic health infrastructure and
strengthening control of communicable diseases, particularly malaria, TB, and HIV/AIDS. IDA's Social
Fund II Project (FY99) is supporting some construction of village health facilities. A health SWAP would
build on the existing policy framework by strengthening the institutional capacity of the implementing
entities concerned. The key issue now is refining the broad strategy, addressing such issues as private
participation, cost recovery, and staff training, and devising an appropriate sequencing of these actions. In
addition, an expenditure program needs to be finalized with the Ministry of Economy and Finance. There
is a consensus among development partners that the health SWAP should be applied first in four to six
provinces where capacity is greatest before ultimately being extended nationwide. Within this framework,
IDA's value added in the initial stages would be in healthcare financing reform and in building capacity
for healthcare administration. As the SWAP is refined, the Bank would also support vertical programs in
malaria and HIV/AIDS through the district-based delivery system, and the supply of essential drugs in the
selected provinces. A Health Sector Support Operation is scheduled for FY0 1.
* Participate in an Education SWAP. Numerous bilateral donors and NGOs are active in this sector,
supporting various programs, some of which are highly specialized. Substantial assistance is being
provided by UN agencies, ADB and the EC. IDA recently approved an Education Quality Improvement
LIL (FY00) that is developing a model of transparent, performance-based resource management for basic
education. IDA has also supported the work of a National Higher Education Task Force, which has made
recommendations for restnrcturing the higher education system. Given the substantial presence of other
donors, IDA had not proposed further financial support to education. However, the government strongly
requested IDA to remain in the sector by contributing analytical work and by scaling-up its existing
activities. Therefore, during the CAS period, IDA will work with the government and its partners
through a newly established Sector Working Group to conduct an Education Sector Review, to be
completed in early 2000 with leading technical support from the ADB. This review would form the basis
for a SWAP. It is likely to recommend development of the entire sector, including basic, secondary, and
higher education, increased access to schooling for girls, and ways to strengthen the financial
management capacity of the education ministry. ADB is expected to support secondary education. IDA
would support continued investment in primary education through aBasic Education Quality Improvement
Operation (FY03) as a follow-up to the ongoing LIL and target increased enrollment of girls. The
marginal benefits of investing in the basic education of girls are likely to be very high in terms of
While it may be difficult to privatize the EDC in the short term due to its serious financial problems and the uncertain regulatory and investment
climate, privatization is a medium-term goal, and the Bank Group's work in the energy sector will help the government to make the appropriate
preparations for privatization including negotiations with potential foreign strategic investors. In the short term, the Bank Group will assist the EDC in
identifying and negotiatingwith a strategic foreign utility to help strengthen its financial performance via an appropriately structured incentive-based
management contract. In this regard, it will be critical to ensure that the chosen partner has a vested interest in the EDC's performance.
21

- 26 -

improving their health, nutrition, and income-earning abilities as well as for social cohesion. Building on
the work of the higher education task force, IDA would also finance a Higher Education and Leadership
Development Operation (FY02), to help train a core group of professionals for public service, and
strengthen higher education institutions through the development of quality standards, organizational
improvements, staff training, and building skills of ministry staff in basic financial management.
Improving leadership skills would contribute substantially to improving governance and public sector
performance.
66.
The Bank Group's approach to facilitating private sector development incorporates many of the
interventions outlined above: strengthening governance (in particular the development of a more predictable
legal/judicial framework),building infrastructure through public-private partnerships and, where appropriate,
assisting in the privatization of state-owned utilities, and raising the level of education and skills of the labor
force. IDA and the IFC will complement each other's activities as the IFC becomes more closely involved in
policy dialogue, analytical work, and capacity building. The following interventions are proposed. It should be
noted that the IFC's interventions, particularly in project financing, are contingent on market conditions, and
the scale and scope of its program will therefore continue to evolve during the CAS period.
* The IFC is investing in several projects in the sector. The IFC is currently working to close the $86
million financing for a Board-approved 60-megawatt independent power project in Phnom Penh so that
the project can be implemented in calendar year 2000. IFC is also potentially interested in helping to
attract private capital and expertise into electricity distribution should the reforms in the sector enable
private participation. IFC is considering financing a loan to a Siem Reap hotel venture sponsored by a
consortium of foreign investors.
* Through various initiatives,the IFC has capital available to finance projects involving SMEs. Following a
year-long IFC/MPDF TA program designed to turn ACLEDA, a microfinance NGO, into a regulated
formal financial institution with outside shareholders, IFC recently approved a $1.5 million investment in
ACLEDA Bank. ACLEDA has filed for a banking license application and should open in early 2000.The
IFC will also explore other microfinanceopportunities.
* Responding to demand, the IFC is helping to establish a Private Sector Forum for constructive dialogue
between the private sector and government to address investment issues. The initiative involves the whole
Bank Group, and will be co-chaired by IFC and IDA representatives in Phnom Penh. The Prime Minister
has already chaired discussions with private businesses: the first large-scale meeting took place in
December 1999; the next is scheduled for June 2000. Other IFC capacity-building includes promoting
business associations particularly for domestic SMEs, giving advice to SMEs on aspects of project
development such as loan applications and management training and conducting industry surveys (for
example on garments and tourism).
* The Bank Group is increasingly providing advice to the government on private sector development. The
IFC is considering involvement in the privatization of the rubber industry, the power and
telecommunications utilities, and a state-owned bank, and in the establishment ofa framework for leasing
companies. FIAS has been asked to work with the government on revising the Law on Investment, to
maintain Cambodia's competitiveness while reviewing the issue of tax incentives. It has also been asked
to assess Cambodia's competitiveness as a location for FDI and to advise on restructuring of the
Council for the Development of Cambodia (CDC) to reflect its changed role under a revised Law on
Investment. MIGA's Investment Marketing Services Department will assist CDC to enhance its
Investment Board's (CIB) capacity for promoting and facilitating investment. Specific outputs are the
establishment of an Internet-accessible database on the business climate and investment opportunities in
Cambodia and the training of CDC/CIB staff in investment promotion, servicing, and monitoring. Since
Cambodia has now formally joined MIGA, other MIGA involvement, including capacity-building and
investment guarantees will also be considered.
67.
Rural Development. In further support of the rural economy, the Bank Group proposes to work with
other partners to identify lessons learned from the numerous ongoing activities and build on them. Many
donors are supporting rural development initiatives, as shown in Table 3). Two IDA operations are being
implemented: the Agriculture Productivity Improvement Project (FY97) and the Northeast Village
Development (NVD) LIL (FY99). In early 2000, IDA will participate in the evaluation of UNDP's CARERE2/Seila programs, which have attempted to establish models of community-based rural development planning.

-

27

-

This process can pave the way towards development of a rural/agricultural SWAP over the medium term. A
Rural Development Strategy is scheduled for FY02 and a Rural Development Operation, building on the NVD
LIL and CARERE/Seilawill be prepared, in concert with others, to support a highly participatory program of
on-farm and off-farm income-generation (FY03). This operation could also be designed to reintegrate
demobilized soldiers back into the economy and help them to support their families. IDA can also add value
in promoting innovative approaches to strategic natural and cultural resources management. Two LILsBiodiversity (FYOO)and Forestry (FY00) will help to build capacity in managing natural resources at the
community level and could contribute to additional off-farm income generation. In addition, as most of
Cambodia's cultural resources, including its renowned temples, are located in rural communities, a Tourism Cultural Resource Management LIL (FY02), is proposed to support these communities and alsoto test publicprivate-civil society partnerships in the area of cultural heritage preservation and tourism development.
Women entrepreneursat the provincial/communelevel could be specifically targeted.
E. CAS SCENARIOS

68.
The base case assistance program is consistent with the "full reform macroeconomic scenario"
described in Part III. The amount of IDA lending is determined by Cambodia's IDA allocation, which is based
on annual Country Performance and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) and governance and portfolio
performance ratings. In 1998, Cambodia received a governance discount that reduced its IDA allocation to
SDR 80 million for FYOO-02.However, based on its improved performance in FY99, Cambodia's IDA
allocation for FYO1-03has increased to SDR 167 million. The base case IDA lending program is therefore
$270 million over the four-year period FYOO-03.Assuming a continued steady improvement in IDA ratings,
the program is back-loaded, with an initial level of $45 million for FYOO and an average of $75 million per
annum in subsequentyears. IFC financial support is incremental and demand driven.
Table 5: Indicative FYOO-03Lending Scenarios and Triggers
BASE CASE ASSUMPTIONS
full macroeconomic reform scenario
* Macroeconomicframework satisfactory to IDA and IMF;
* Implementationand systematic monitoring of priority
structural reforms in the ESAF and SAC: (i) domestic
revenue/GDPratio exceeds 12 percent by 2002; (ii) share
of recurrent budget expenditure to priority sectors (health,
education, agricultureand rural development) in terms of
the share of total recurrent expenditure exceeds 3.7
percent of GDP by 2002, with at least 50 percent cash
disbursementsto these sectors; (iii) satisfactory review of
forest concessionsand initiation of follow-up actions;
enactment of the Forestry Code;
* Initiation of implementation of a pilot military
demobilizationprogram by mid-2000;
* Completion of a GovernanceAction Plan, including
performance monitoring indicators, by September 2000;
implementationof priority actions initiated by December
2000;
*
Satisfactoryportfolio performance (less than 25 percent
problemprojects or projects at risk).
Lending: $270 million

HIGH CASE
accelerated reform scenario
BASE CASE PLUS:
*
Acceleratedprogress in structural
reforms (ahead of agreedtargets
under the PRGF and SAC);
* 75-100 percent cash
disbursements to priority sectors,
based on allocations;
* Design of full-scale military
demobilization following
satisfactory assessment of
progress with the pilot, by mid2001;
*
Satisfactoryimplementation of
the Governance Action Plan;
*
Satisfactory portfolio
performance (less than 15 percent
problem projects or projects at
risk and disbursement ratio over
20 percent).
Lending: $350 million

LOW CASE
limited or no reform scenario
*
Political and
macroeconomicinstability
*
Failure to protect social
expenditure; military
expenditure exceeds 3
percent of GDP
*
Failure to implement pilot
military demobilization;
*
Failure to initiate
implementation of
Governance Action Plan;
*
Deterioration in the
portfolio: over 25 percent
problem projects.

Lending: $60 million

69.
The high case lending scenario assumes that macroeconomic and structural reforms will accelerate
and consistently exceed targets agreed under the base case, as the government makes more concerted efforts to
improve governance and strengthen its institutional capacity. Triggers for the high case would be 75-100
percent cash disbursements relative to allocations to priority expenditure sectors (health, education,
agriculture, and rural development), the design of a full-scale military demobilization program upon the
satisfactory completion and evaluation of the pilot, the satisfactory implementation of the Governance Action
Plan, and a substantial improvement in portfolio performance, particularly with regard to financial
management. In this case, it is envisaged thatIDA lending would increase to $350 million over the four-year
period, with a greater proportion of fast-disbursing loans to support continued implementation of policy
reforms and SWAPs. IDA would also consider increasing the level of lending in the event of external shocks,

- 28 provided that the government's policy response in terms of structural reform and protecting the poor is
adequate and that the macroeconomic framework is satisfactory to IDA and the IMF.
70.
If the political or security situation deteriorates, macroeconomic stability cannot be maintained, severe
governance problems persist, and structural policy reforms are not implemented (particularly failure to close
tax loopholes, halt illegal logging, or protect social expenditures) a low case lending scenario of about $60
million in lending over four years would be triggered. IDA resources would focus on non-lending and policy
advice, with lending limited to one operation or 1-2 LILs per year targeting the social/rural sectors to protect
the poor and vulnerable groups. Under this scenario, collaboration with development partners and SWAPs
would still be pursued, although financial support for SWAP implementation would be delayed.
F. MONITORING
ANDEVALUATION
FRAMEWORK
71.
More consistent and rigorous monitoring of development assistance, coupled with closer tracking of
progress in the government's reform program, is a guiding principle of the CAS, since it is focused on povertyreduction outcomes. The proposed monitoring framework is comprised of two tiers. The first tier is a set of
economic and social indicators (outcome indicators) consistent with global development goals established by
the international community (see Table 6A).
Table 6A: CAS Monitoring Indicators: Medium-term Outcomes
PRELIMINARY OUTCOME INDICATORS FOR CAMBODIA
Baseline
Targets for 2002
1997*
POVERTY
Headcount index (%/o)
36.0
27.0
HEALTHSTATUS
Infant mortality (/1,000)
23103.0
80.0
2
Matemal mortality (/100,000)
473.0
4440-0
Access to safe water (%)
13.0
17.0
New malaria cases diagnosed & treated at public
147.0
124.0
health facilities. ('000)
HIV Prevalence (% of pop.)
4.0
3.5
EDUCATION
Net Primary Enrollment (%)
78.0
85.0
Net lower Sec. enrollment (%)
Male
27.7
30.0
Female
12.5
15.5
INFRASTUCTURE
Paved/gravelroads % of total
12.0
14.0
GDP PER CAPITA ($)
282.0
360.0"
Agriculture growth (% annual)
1.2
4.5
Tourism growth (% annual)
12.0
22.5
Growth in FDI (% annual)
9.0
25.0
Tax revenue (% of GDP)
6.6
8.3
Investment (% of GDP)
19.1
22.0

GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS FOR 2015
*Reduce extreme poverty by 50%
*Reduce maternal mortality by three-quarters
*Reduce infant and child mortality by two-thirds
*Universal access to reproductive health

*Universalprimary education
*Eliminategender disparity in education

72.
These proposed outcome indicators are based on relevant historical data for Cambodia, the
performance of other low-income countries, and the macroeconomic growth projections for the full reform
scenario discussed in Part II. They will be further refined by the government and its development partners in
the context of the SWAPs and of the planned PRSP (interim and full-scale). Ultimately a full set of outcome
indicators will be agreed upon by all key stakeholders, and the monitoring process will become transparent
and participatory. The government is expected to take primary responsibility for monitoring these indicators
and has identified a focal point for collecting and disseminating the appropriate data. An attempt has also been
made to use indicators for which the government can readily obtain data.

Baseline data are taken from the Socioeconomic Survey, 1997. According to the Cambodia General Census, 1998 (Ministry of Planning), infant
mortality was 89.4/1,000 in 1998.
13 Healthcare targets will be further refined during SWAP preparation. The Ministry of Health has set more ambitious targets, including reduction in
matemal mortalityto 200/100,000 and in infant mortality to 65/1,000 by 2003.
2' Base case projections assume a 27 percent growth in per capita GDP between 1997 and 2003.
22

- 29

-

73.
The second tier of indicators comprises intermediate milestones. These are indicators directly related
to the Bank Group's dialogue and program with the government that would contribute to the achievement of
the above-mentioneddevelopment outcomes. Milestones would be used for self-evaluation. Apreliminary set
is shown in Table 6B, and additional benchmarks are shown in Annex 9. These milestones are linked to
sectoral or cross-sectoral programs that are under development and will need to be further refined and
quantified as the programs evolve. They could also be amended during the CAS cycle if priorities in the field
change or if more action is required in certain areas to accelerate poverty reduction.
Table 6B: CAS Monitoring Indicators: Intermediate Milestones
AREA
Anti-corruption and
Legal/Judicial Reform
Public Sector Reform
Forestry

Land
Health
Education
Infrastructure
Macroeconomy
Private Sector
Development
Portfolio

PRELIMINARY MILESTONES
Govemance Action Plan drafted and disseminated: milestones to be clearly set.
Number of govemment staff trained in basic accounting and auditing procedures.
Agreement on a legal/judicial sector strategy and expenditure program.
Number of soldiers permanently demobilized and reintegrated into communities.
Reduction in ghost and redundant civil servants as a result of the census and functional analysis.
Increase in the number of non-performing forestry contracts terminated.
Establishment of a forest crime monitoring facility satisfactory to IDA and drop in illegal log exports reported by
Global Witness (NGO).
Mapping and registration of land in pilot area.
Agreement with the govemment and development partnerson sector strategy and expenditure program (SWAP).
Healthcare coverage increases 2.5 percent annually.
Number of adults aged 15-45 adhering to HIV/AIDS prevention guidelines increases by 15 percent annually.
Increase in average years of schooling and decrease in dropout and repetition rates for school clusters supported by IDA
programs.
Development and adoption of higher education quality and financing standards.
Percentage increase in km of rural access roads; passable rural roads as a percentage of the total.
Increased access of households to safe water supply and sanitation services.
Increased percentage of rural households with access to electricity.
SAC/PRCF milestones, and PRSP indicators to be developed.
Medium-term Expenditure Framework in place by end 2002.
Forum for public-private sector dialogue established.
Preliminaryregulatory framework for PPI in place by 2002.
Zero unsatisfactory portfolio ratings.
100 percent timely audit compliance and satisfactory audits.
Project financial management systems implementedacross the board; satisfactory annual financial management reviews

G.

MANAGING

RISKS

74.
The CAS program will be implemented in a risky political and economic environment; risks are
primarily endogenous. The principal risks in order of probability are that:
The reform program may slacken if the government proves itself to have insufficient political will to push
T
the reforms through if they encroach on powerful vested interests.For example, there is still a risk of rapid
and irrecoverable depletion of forest resources, though illegal logging has recently slowed following
decisive government action. If political will for reform wanes, donor support mayalso flag, particularly if
progress is not made in improving governance. This risk could be mitigated by a concerted effort on the
part of donors in policy dialogue and close monitoring, with the greater involvement of civil society;
• Despite the government's commitment, the implementation of the reform program may be delayed
because of institutional capacity constraints. The issue for Cambodia's development partners is how to
balance pressure for continued reform with institutional support that builds long-term capacity with
monitorable outcomes, rather than speeding implementation with "quick fix" substitution technical
assistance. The Bank Group will integrate capacity-building into all its operations, particularly at the local
level.
• The downsizing of the civil service and the military may lead to social unrest if the private sector and
rural communities are unable to absorb retrenched workers and veterans quickly enough and if land
allocation issues are not adequately handled. This risk can be mitigated by strong efforts in rural
developmentand in land management and administration and by improving the business climate.
* Although armed conflict has ended and peace has prevailed for more than a year since the last elections,
some political instability remains. There is lingering friction between the government and opposition
particularly on issues of governance and accountability. The upcoming commune elections may aggravate
this. There is also a risk that the commune elections may be delayed due to a difficulty in reaching
consensus on the extent to which power should be devolved from the center and due to high administrative

- 30 -

costs. The eventual trial of former Khmer Rouge leaders will be highly sensitive. The Bank Group's
ability to mitigate these political risks is limited, except by promoting activities that foster greater
participation and transparency.
75.
Key exogenous risks are natural disasters, particularly flooding, which could adversely affect the rice
harvest, and a renewed regional financial crisis, which would dampen investment and export prospects. As
Cambodia is heavily export-dependent, external shocks such as adverse price fluctuations could lower export
growth.
76.
There are further risks to the Bank Group's program. The principal portfolio risk is weak financial
management leading to corruption. This will be mitigated by more intensive financial monitoring and regular
training in project financial management procedures, as well as by capacity-building in accounting and
auditing. Lastly, there are several risks associated with the enhanced partnership processes, particularlywith
the SWAPs. The magnitude of the task at hand will require considerable time, staffing, and resources. The
government may not, despite its commitment, have sufficient capacity to direct the process adequately. A
significant number of donors may choose not to become involved, despite their initial enthusiasm. These risks
would be mitigated by allocating sufficient resources early in the CAS, candid dialogue and continuous
consensus building, and the use of step-by-stepapproaches among partners.
February 7, 2000
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By: Sven Sandstr6m

Peter L. Woicke

STATISTICAL ANNEXES

Annex 1

- 31 -

Cambodia at a glance
East
Asia &
Pacific

Low-.
income

10.7
260
3.0

1,817
990
1,802

3,515
520
1,844

2.6
2.6

12
16

17
1.9

31
63
69

110
119
100

35
69
37
20
77
15
117
119
118

74
32
108
113
103

1978

1988

1997

1998

.

..

..

94
2.6
1.9

3.1
19.0
31.6
10.3
12.2

POVERTY and SOCIAL
Cambodia
1998t
Population,mid-year
(milrions)
GNP per capita (Atlas method, USS)
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Development diamond'
Lfe expectancy

Average annual growth, 1992-98
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GNP
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1992-98)
Poverty (% of population below nationalpoverty line)
Urbanpopulation (%oftotalpopulation)
Life expectancy atbirth
(years)
Infant mortality (pet 1,W000
ive births)
Child malnutrition (% o/children under 5)
Access to safe water
(% of population)
Dliteracy (% ofpopvlsionage 15-)
Gross primaryenrollment
(% of school-age population)
Male
Female

36
211
54
103
38
13

Gross
prossr
enrollment
p

|

Access to safe water

Cambodia
Low-inomegroup

KEY ECONOMICRATIOS and LONG-TERMTRENDS
GDP(US$billions)
GOP CUSS
billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domesticsavingslGDP
Gross national savings/GDP

.
..
.

Current accountbalanceJGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service,exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

..

.
.
.

.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Economic
ratios'

2.9
l
15.0T
34.1Trade
S.S
67

4-8
01
68.9
1.0
52.4
163.1

-8.3
0.2
770.2
1.3

1998-02

Domestic
Savings

Investment

Indebtedness
1978-8

1988-98

1997

1998

4.9

10

1.0

..

..

.

.

1978

1988

1997

1998

Agricuhure
Industry
Manufacturing
Sen i;es

.
..

62.4
13.8
7.1
23.9

50.7
14.8
5.8
34.5

50.6
6
14.8
6.2
34.6

Private consumption
General governmentconsumption
Importsof goods and services

.

92.7
5.4
10.1

80.7
9.0
40.3

85.8
8.7
43.6

1988-98

1997

1998 .

2.4
85
71
6.5

1.3
-2.8
7.6
2.8

0.4
1.1
6.4
1.6

(average annualtrowth)
GDP
GNPper capita
Exports of goods and services

..

Cambodia
Low-incomegroup

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
Growth of investment and GDP (%)

(% of GDP)a
..
..

..
..

1978-88
(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Grossdomestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Gross national product

.
..
..

2
0
93

9t
-GOT

95

se

97
GDP

s8

97

98

Growth of exports and imports (%)
21

.
93

94
95
96
Exports
E
rIempodvs

Note: 1998 data are preliminaryestimates.
*The diamondsshow four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond wil
be inromplete.

-32 -

Annex 1

Cambodia
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1978
Domestic pnces
(% change)
Consumerprices
ImplicitGDPdeflator
Govemmentfinance
(% of GDP,includescurrentgrants)
Current
revenue
Currentbudgetbalance
Overallsurplus/deficit

1988

1997

1998

..

8.0
9.2

14.8
17.0

Inflation(%)
.150

..
..

76.6

100l
S0
_

3
9

..
..
..

3.9
-1.0
-1.7

9.7
0.6
-4.3

8.7
-0.3
-5.8

1978

1988

1997

1998

Exportand inport levels(USSmill.)

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

786
23

1,500T

Food
Fueland energy

823
2
88
392
1,138

..

.

.

Capitalgoods

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

92
97
95

,-50

9
9
-GOP deflator -O

CP1

TRADE
(US$millions)
Totalexports(fob)
Rubber
Logsand sawntimber
Manufactures
Total imports(cif)

ExDortoriceindex(1995=100)
ImoortDriceindex (1995=100)
Termsof trade(1995=100)

128
279
1,143

1

0 1 dJ

s0t

o

92

88
90
98

93

94

95

* Exports

96
* Imports

BALANCEof PAYMENTS
(USS millionsl
Exportsof goodsand services
Importsofgoodsand services
Resourcebalance

1978

1988

..
..
..

..
..
..

1997
977
1,245
-267

1998
978
1,251
-273

Net income
Netcurrenttransfers

..

-7
4..
105

-48

..

Curremnt
accountbalance

..

..

-209

-260

5

Financingitems(net)
Changesin net reserves

..
..

..

299
-90

365
-105

-20

Memo:
Reservesindudinaoold fUSSmillions)
Conversionrate (DEC.IocalfUSS)

..

61

2.946.3

3.744.4

Currentaccountbalanceto GDP(%)
0

W

-5
0-

tI Iu I

EXTERNALDEBTand RESOURCEFLOWS
1978

1988

1997

1998

(USSmillions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

1
0
0

40
0
0

2,129
0
132

2,210
0
157

Total debtservice
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

0
0

10
0

13
0

0

1

1

Compositionof net resourceflws
Official
grants
Officialrcredrtors
Privatecreditors
Foreigndirectinvestment
Portfolioequity
WorldBankprogram
Commitments
Disbursements
Principalrepayments
Netflows
Interestpayments
Nettransfers
DevelopmentEconomics

Compositionof 1998debt (USSmill.)

176
39
-3

..

..

0
0

0
0

..
..

.

0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

57
30
0
30
1
30

F: 3: 42B: 157C:67

_

119

..

55
-3
E:1.522
31
19
0
19
1
18

A -IBRD
B- IDA
C-IMP

E -Bilateral
D-Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

1t10100

- 33 -

Annex 2

SELECTED INDICATORS OF PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects under implementationa
Average implementation period (years)b
Percent of problem projectsa,c
by number
by amount
Percent of projects at riska,d
by number
by amount
Disbursement ratio (%)e

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000 f

5
1.40

7
1.83

6
2.13

9
2.16

10
2.42

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

11.11
7.06

10.00
6.79

0.00
0.00
13.50

0.00
0.00
20.37

16.67
24.19
27.35

0.00
0.00
21.11

10.00
6.79
6.80

no
1,512.36
302.47

no
600.18
85.74

no
385.19
64.20

no
497.26
55.25

Yes
335.04
33.50

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum item
Projects evaluated by OED
by number
by amount (US$ millions)
Percent rated U or HU
by number
by amount

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Since FY80

Last five FYs

2
102.70

2
102.70

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress
(IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: investment projects only.
As of December 31, 1999.

Annex 3

~ 34BANK GROUPPROGRAM SUMMARY
(a) Proposed IDA Base Case Lending Program, FYOO-03

FY

Project

$million
equivalent

Strategic Rewards
(H/MIL)

Implementation Risks

00

Education Quality Improvement LIL
Biodiversity & Protected Areas LIL
Forestry Policy LIL
Structural Adjustment Credit
Subtotal

5.0
5.0
5.0
30.0
45.0

H
M
H
H

M
H
M
H

01

Economic Capacity-Building
Land Management LIL
Health Sector Support Operation
Rural Electrification & Transmission
Subtotal

3.0
5.0
30.0
40.0
78.0

M
H
H
M

M
M
M
M

02

Legal Reform Operation
Public Sector Reform Operation
Rural and Provincial Infrastructure
Higher Education & Leadership Dev.
Subtotal

5.0
40.0
40.0
12.0
97.0

H
H
H
H

H
H
M
M

03

Basic Education/Quality Improvement
Rural Development Operation
Cultural Heritage LIL
Subtotal

20.0
25.0
5.0
50.0

H
H
M

L
M
M

Total base case

$270.0

35

Annex 3

(b) Cambodia - IFC and MIGA Program, FY96-00

Category
IFC approvals(US$m)'

1996
0.00

Past
1997
5.25

1998
21.30

1999
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Sector(%)
0.00

Hotels & Tourism
Infrastructure
TOTAL
Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equityb
Other
TOTAL
MIGA guarantees(US$m)
MIGA commitments (US$m)

0.00
0.00

100.00
0.00

0.00
100.00

0.00
0.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

70.40
0.00
20.00
9.60

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

aIncludesquasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Current
2000

-36 -

Annex 4

SUMMARY OF NONLENDING SERVICES
(includes Grant-financed Capacity Building/TA)
Produd

0
Comptetn
FY

Recent completions
PublicExpenditureReview

FY99

273.8

Power Sector StrategyNote

FY99

184.2

Underwayt
PovertyAssessmentand StrategyReport

FY00

114.4

DiagnosticStudy on Governanceand
Corruption
GovernanceActionPlan preparation
AnalyticalSectorNotes for CASC
TransportStrategy(project-financed)

FY00

40.5

FY00
FY00
FY00

40.0
130.0
-

Rural Electrification(project-financed)

FY00

-

Waterand SanitationPolicy (projectfinanced)

FY00

-

ConsultativeGroup Meeting

Obe

CotSAiee
Government,Bank
group,partners,public
Government,Bank
group,partners,public

PS

Government,Bank
group,partners,public
Govermment,
Bank
group,partners,public
Government
Bank group
Government,Bank
group,partners,public
Government,Bank
group,partners,public
Governnent,Bank
group,partners,public

K, PS,

Government,Bank
group,partners

PD, SD

PS

PD
G, PS, SD
BSP
K, PS, SD,PP
K, PS, SD,PP
K, PS, SD,PP

FYOO-03

87.5

Planned
Land Policy and IssuesNote, Land
Study/Analysis

FY00

--

Government,Bank
group,partners,public

K, PS, SD, PP

Legal/JudicialNeeds Assessment

FY01

228

K, PS, SD,PP

CountryFrameworkReport for PPI

FYOI

100

HealthcareFinancingReform

FYOI

228

Public InstitutionsReview

FY01

228

FY01, 02

228

Government,Bank
group,partners
Government,Bank
group,partners
Government,Bank
group,partners
Government,Bank
group,partners,public
Government

ParticipatoryPovertyAssessment

FY02

228

K, PS, SD,PP, M

Support for preparationof Poverty
ReductionStrategyPaper (PRSP)
Rural DevelopmentStrategy

FYOI,02, 03

TBD

Governnent,Bank
group,partners,public
Government

FY02

228

Government,Bank
group,partners,public

K, PS, SD, PP, M

Capacity-buildingfor Poverty
Monitoring

a.
b.
c

K, PS, SD, PP
K, PS, SD, PP
K, PS, SD,PP, M
PS, M

K, PS, SD, PP, M

Government,donor, Bank,public dissemination.
Knowledgegeneration,public debate, problem-solving.
Sector notes for education, health, rural, financial sector, private sector, social and gender assessment, land and vulnerable
groups assessment,partnershipsnote.
d. G= Government;B=BankGroup;BSP=BankGroupStrategyPreparation;P=-Public,includingcivilsociety;DP= PolicyDiscussion;M=
Monitoring;
KG=KnowledgeGeneration;PD=PublicDebate;PS=ProblemSolving;PP--ProjectPreparation;SD-=StakeholderDiscussion

Theseareestimates.

-37 -

Annex 5

CAMBODIASOCIALINDICATORS
Latest single Vear
1970-75
POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urbanheadcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTIONDISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highestquintile (% of income or consumption)

7.1
0.5
10.3
5.5

1980-85
7.4
2.6
14.8
5.1

Same region/income group
1992-97
10.5
2.2
21.6
4.6

East Asia
& Pacific

LowIncome

1,751.2
1.0
33.0
2.1

2,035.6
1.7
28.4
4.0

970.0
114.0

350.0
122.0

36.0
21.1
40.1
300.0
115.0
0.42

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% ofGDP)
0.7
1.7
Education (% of GNP)
5.8
2.9
2.7
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary schoolenrollment rate /a
(% of age group)
Total
98.0
101.0
Male
101.0
Female
102.0
Access to safe water
(% of population)
Total
45.0
13.0
77.0
Urban
97.0
20.0
Rural
38.0
12.0
Immunizationrate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
68.0
93.0
DPT
70.0
93.0
Child malnutrition(% under 5 years)
20.0
38.0
20.0
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Total
40.0
45.0
54.0
69.0
Male
39.0
44.0
53.0
67.0
Female
42.0
47.0
55.0
70.0
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
181.0
160.0
103.0
37.0
Under 5 (per thousandlive births)
244.0
330.0
147.0
47.0
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000population)
509.0
473.0
349.0
183.0
Female (per 1,000population)
406.0
355.0
303.0
148.0
Matemal (per 100,000live births)
500.0
473.0
120.0
a. Ratios exceeding 100indicate discrepanciesbetween the estimatesof school age population and reported enrollment data.
1999 World DevelopmentIndicators CD-ROM, World Bank.

1.0

69.0
80.0
66.0
74.0
76.0
59.0
58.0
60.0
82.0
118.0
274.0
255.0

- 38 -

Annex 6

CAMBODIA- KEY ECONOMICINDICATORS

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domesticproduct'

1000

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Agriculture

51.0

52.0

51.0

51.0

51.0

54.0

54.0

53.0

52.0

Industry

14.0

14.0

15.0

15.0

15.0

16.0

16.0

16.0

17.0

Services

35.0

34.0

34.0

34.0

35.0

30.0

30.0

31.0

31.0

Total Consumption
Gross domesticfixed investment
Govemment investment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b

96.0
18.0
5.0
13.0

96.0
22.0
7.0
15.0

90.0
26.0
6.0
19.0

90.0
19.0
5.0
14.0

95.0
15.0
4.0
11.0

93.0
20.0
5.0
15.0

92.0
21.0
6.0
15.0

90.0
22.0
7.0
15.0

S9.0
22.0
7.0
15.0

22.0

31.0

26.0

32.0

34.0

32.0

32.0

33.0

33.0

Imports (GNFS)

36.0

49.0

42.0

40.0

44.0

45.0

46.0

45.0

44.0

4.0
5.0

4.0
5.0

10.0
11.0

10.0
12.0

5.0
7.0

7.0
7.0

8.0
7.0

10.0
9.0

11.0
10.0

2,409.0

2,938.0

3,144.0

3,089.0

2,871.0

3,152.0

3,437.0

3,789.0

4,176.0

240.0

280.0

300.0

300.0

280.0

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1998 prices)
Gross domesticproduct at market prices
4.0
7.6
Gross Domestic Income

7.0

1.0

1.0

5.5

6.0

6.0

..

..

-1.3

-1.2

2.3

3.4

4.0

4.1

..

..

..

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'
Memorandum items
Gross domesticproduct
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1998 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
1.2
4.8
4.4
Total consumption
..
..
..
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
522.0
919.0
805.0

4.5
..

977.0

978.0

994.0

1,115.0

1,244.0

1,376.0

MerchandiseFOB
Imports (GNFS)b

462.0
872.0

798.0
1,432.0

618.0
1,308.0

786.0
1,245.0

823.0
1,251.0

822.0
1,411.0

914.0
1576.0

1,024.0
1,697.0

1,137.0
1,848.0

Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance (incl. Grants)

737.0
-350.0
34.0
-115.0

1,244.0 1,093.0
-513.0 -503.0
83.0
124.0
-166.0 -193.0

1,051.0
-267.0
105.0
-44.0

1,047.0
-273.0
61.0
-67.0

1,187.0
-416.0
86.0
-214.0

1,329.0 1,449.0
-461.0 -453.0
88.0
89.0
-270.0 -277.0

1,599.0
-472.0
91.0
-305.0

Net private foreign direct investment
80.0
Long-termloans (net)
55.0
Official
55.0
Private
0.0
Other capital (net incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
-72.0
Mlemorandumitems
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( 1998 prices)
Merchandiseexports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

-14.5

151.0
81.0
68.0
13.0
13.0
-79.0

294.0
73.0
76.0
-3.0
-103.0
-70.0

168.0
36.0
39.0
-3.0
-70.0
-90.0

120.0
-74.0
55.0
-130.0
126.0
-105.0

120.0
135.0
-51.0
186.0
0.0
-42.0

130.0
205.0
-6.0
211.0
0.0
-65.0

140.0
210.0
101.0
108.0
0.0
-73.0

150.0
246.0
113.0
133.0
0.0
-92.0

-17.5

-16.0

-8.7

-9.5

-13.2

-13.4

-11.9

-11.3

..

..

..

..

(Continued)

-39 -

Annex 6

CAMBODIA - KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS

(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+)ordeficit(-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetaryindicators
M2/GDP
Growsthof M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

9.6
11.0
-1.4
5.5
1.0

8.9
9.6
-0.7
7.1
7.8

9.1
9.9
-0.8
6.4
8.2

9.7
9.0
0.7
5.0
4.9

8.7
9.0
-0.3
5.8
4.7

11.2
9.5
1.7
5.0
3.9

11.4
9.7
1.7
5.9
5.0

11.9
10.9
1.1
6.8
7.9

13.2
11.2
2.0
7.3
7.9

7.4
35.6
174.8

9.0
43.6
93.7

11.0
40.4
116.7

11.7
16.6
156.6

11.4
15.7
12.5

12.1
18.4
70.2

12.8
16.1
97.0

13.2
13.2
97.0

13.5
13.2
97.0

-0.5
8.9

7.7
9.1

6.8
7.1

8.0
9.2

14.8
17.0

3.6

4.0

4.0

Price indices( 1998=100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandiseterms of trade index
Real exchangerate (US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumerprice index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e
f

GDP at market prices
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includesnet unrequitedtransfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidatedcentral govemment.
"LCU" denotes "local currencyunits." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

..

6.2

- 40 -

Annex 7

CAMBODIA- KEY ExPosuRE INDICATORS

Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
1,915.0 2,035.0 2,100.0 2,129.0 2,210.0 2,343.0 2,541.0

2,737.0

2,970.0

73.0

106.0

74.0

49.0

56.0

135.0

205.0

210.0

246.0

2.0

6.0

10.0

10.0

13.0

147.0

164.0

96.0

146.0

366.8
79.5
0.4
90.9

219.6
69.3
0.7
93.0

257.4
66.8
1.2
93.6

214.1
68.9
1.0
93.3

206.6
77.0
1.3
93.2

230.0
74.3
14.4
86.0

222.0
73.9
14.3
79.3

215.0
72.2
7.5
77.3

211.0
71.1
10.4
75.1

5.1

7.6

20.7

14.7

320.0

Net disbursements(US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
..
IBRD DS/public DS
100.0
Preferred creditor
DS/public
DS (%)'
..
IBRD DS/XGS
..
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees(US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
39.0
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

..

..

..

18.9

26.6

36.0

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

24.6

..

65.0

..

..

..

..

..

108.0

132.0

157.0

182.0

227.0

272.0

3.0

7.3

15.0
4.3

1.0
0.5

4.0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees(US$m)
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteeddebt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital. Debt service up to 1999 are actual, and from 1999 onwards are scheduled.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, includingworkers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks,the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includespresent value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

STATEMENT OF

IDA'S COMMITTED

AND DISBURSED PORTFOLIO

STATUS OF BANK GROUP OPERATIONS

(Operations Portfolio)
(as of December 31, 1999)
Closed 2 Projects
Board Date
Fiscal Year
1995
1995
1996
1997
1997
1998
1999
1999
1999
2000

Last PSR
SupervisionRating b/
Development Implementation

Active
Projects
P037088
P034755
P004032
P004033
P004034
P045629
P058841
P004030
P050601
P059971

KH-Social Fund
Technical Assistance
Phnom Penh Power Rehab.
Agri. Product Implementation
KH-Disease Control & Health
Urban Water Supply
KH Northeast Village
KH-RD Rehabilitation
KH-Social Fund 11
KH-Education Quality lmprov. I

Objectives
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Progress
HS
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
9

DifferenceBetween
Expected and Actual
Disbursements "'

Original Amount in US$ Millions
IBRD
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

IDA
20.0
17.0
40.0
27.0
30.0
31.0
5.00
45.3
25.0
5.00

Cancel
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Undisb.
0.09
2.66
2.55
24.29
19.75
26.96
4.69
43.75
22.92
5.08

Frm Rev'd

Orig.
1.53
3.53
7.37
15.67
11.04
12.81
0.87
2.38
1.65
0O

0
0
0
2.85
0
0
0
0
0
0

G

ISSUESAND PROBLEM PROPOSEDSTRATEGIES&
MEASURES
|
DIAGNOSIS
Al. Need to strengthen
governance and reduce
corruption in the public
sector
* Perceived lack of
transparency in decisionmaking; corruption in
public services; ad-hoc
fees/exemptions etc
* Weak public sector
financial management
capacity

A2. Need to rebuild the
rule of law: regulations,
institutions.
* Current legal and
regulatory provisions are
invariably incomplete,
incapable of being
enforced or lacking in
internal coherence,
contributing to overall
uncertainty.
*Following years of
conflict judicial
institutions have been all
but destroyed. Most of
the qualified judicial staff
have disappeared or left
the country. Low
educational level of
Judges. Less than 20%
have university degrees.
* Poorly equipped
offices

* Quantitative analysis of

corruption prevalence and
impacts: survey businesses,
public officials and citizens
* Prepare action plan on
Governance improvement
* Build skills and develop
standards in Government
financial management,
including accounting, auditing

CAS PERFORMANCE MATRIX
WORLDBANKGROlP
DEVELOPMENTPARTNERS |
PROGRAM
A. ENHANCING GOVERNANCE
*IDF-Governance
GOVERNANCE
*IDF-Financial
ADB, Germany:
INsTITuTIoN-BuILDING/PuBLIc Accountability
* SAC (FY00)
SECTORREFORM:IOM EU,
* Public Institutional Review
Australia, Japan; PUBLIC
EXPENDITURE(PIR) (FY01)
ADMINISTRATION.+
* Public Sector Reform
ADB, Australia,France
Operation (PRS) (FY02)

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS
* Improved methodologies
for analyzing impacts of
corruption
* Governance Action Plan
drafted and disseminated
* Govemment staff
training in accounting and
auditing, and procurement
delivered
* Project financial
management systems
implemented across the
board

* SECTOR-WIDE

APPROACH
*Strengthen public confidence
in the legal system through
institutional reforms; more
transparent regulations for
businesses.
*Legal diagnostic
(commercial, financial
legislation), training needs
assessment
*Capacity-building for legal
drafting and dissemination
*Advisory assistance for
development of commercial
legislation and arbitration
*Continuous long-term legal
and judicial training and
capacity-building
*Creation of new incentive
and accountability systems for
the judiciary

* SWAP
LEGALFRAMEWORK
* Legal Needs Assessment/
ILO, UNHCR ,UNICEF,
Diagnostic (FY00)
UNIFEM: Australia, Canada,
* Legal/Judicial capacityFrance, Japan
ENFORCEMENT/INSTITUTIONS building LIL (FY01)
. IFC, FIAS: review of
ADB, UNICEF, IOM,
investment law (FY00)
UNHCHR, IOM, Germany,
* IFC, FIAS, MIGA: review
Japan
of regulatory environment
for FDI
* IDA/IFC: legal and
regulatory framework for
PPI (see part 4 below)

* Better coordination of

donors and civil society
involved in aspects of
legal and judicial
reform-reflected in
preparation of strategy
under SWAP
* SWAP designed by end
2000
* Timely and regular
publication of laws,
regulations, court
decisions, and effective
dissemination
* Improved public
awareness of financial and
commercial laws, and
institutional
responsibilities for their
enforcement

COUNTRY PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
* Governance Action Plan
completed by September 2000.
* Implementation of priority
actions initiated by end-2000
* Enactment and dissemination
of information of laws on audit,
customs, budget discipline
* Adoption of Intemational
Accounting Standards.
* Establishment of public audit
body
* Annual improved ranking in
internationally-recognized
corruption ratings (e.g. by
Transparency Intemational)
& in domestic corruption
perception surveys
* Multi-year legislative reform
program clearly articulated
* Establishment of commercial
courts for dispute settlement
* Ratification of New York
Convention on Foreign Arbitral
Awards and adoption of
implementation mechanism
* Improved corruption
perception ranking for judiciary
(based on independent surveys)
. Better coordination of
national institutions involved in
legal reform
* Greater private sector and
civil society consultation on
legal/judicial issues
* Judicial qualifications
upgraded,
. Transparent salary structure
in place forjudiciary
* Enforcement of laws
measured by time taken to
processes cases by courts
* Alternative dispute resolution
methods used

DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

WORLD BANK GROUP
PROGRAM

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS

ISSUES AND PROBLEM
DIAGNOSIS

PROPOSED STRATEGIES &
MEASURES

A3. Military
demobilization and
reintegration of
veterans
* need to downsize
armed forces, reduce
military expenditures and
redefine the role of the
military in peacetime
society

* Implementation of pilot
program to demobilize 1,500
soldiers in 4 provinces in
2000. Lessons learned to be
used to prepare program to
demobilize 32,000 soldiers
from the Royal Cambodian
Armed Forces by 2003.
*Reintegration of demobilized
soldiers with their families
into civilian life.
'Efficient and transparent
provision of transitional safety
net to demobilized soldiers;
appropriate modality to be
determined.
*Settlement of demobilized
soldiers and their families in
communities of their choice.
*Targeted support to special
groups (disabled, chronically
ill, over-age, children,
women).
* Census, functional analysis
of civil service to determine
competencies of the executive
structure
a Remuneration analysis
* Development of a civil
service functional model

DEMOBILIZATION
ADB, IOM, New Zealand,
Germany, Japan, NL, Sweden

* TA for Executive

* Reintegration of

Secretariat to the Council for
Demobilization, Council of
Ministers (FY99)

discharged soldiers and
their families mid-end
2000.
* Pilot program:
acceptance of demobilized
soldiers and their families
by the receiving
communities

ADB ,UNDP; IMF-PRGF

*TA (FY95)
* PER (FY99)
*SAC (FY00)
. PIR (FY01)
* PSRL (FY02)

* Completion of civil
service census by mid2000. Number of irregular
or "ghost" workers
identified.
* Completion of
functional analysis of the
civil service by mid-2000

*Increase revenue ratio
relative to GDP.
*Implement Law on Taxation,
esp. VAT
*Eliminate ad hoc exemptions
under law on investment and
other loopholes
'Strengthen administrative
capacity to collect taxes and
further broaden tax base.
* Restructure and privatize

MACROECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT:
IMF, ADB, UNDP, Sweden,
Australia: France

* PER (FY99)
' SAC (FY00)
' Fiscal TA (FY01)
* PSRL (FY02)
*Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (w/IMF)

A4. Public
Administration
Reform:
* need to determine the
tunctions,
accountabilities and
appropriate remuneration
of the civil service.

A5. Weak
domestic revenue
mobilization:
weak revenue
performance (9% of GDP
in 1998) largely due to
excessive tax exemptions
and narrow fax base.

SOE or concession

loss-

m_rakingutilities __X

COUNTRY PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS

* Design and evaluation of
pilot program
* No. of soldiers registered,
identified, discharged
- Transparent land allocation
to demobilized soldiers
* Reduction in poverty among
households of demobilized
soldiers one year after
discharge
* Reduction in military
expenditure to 2 percent of
GDP or below by 2003.

* Medium-term vision for civil

i

service role articulated
* Civil service staffing
requirements defined
* Public sector wage bill
adjusted in line with functional
needs.

Enhanced revenues against
budget target:
* Increased and transparent
non-tax revenue transfer to
budget
'Increase revenue ratio over
12% of GDP by 2002)
>

_A

ISSUES AND PROBLEM
DIAGNOSIS
*Revenueloss arising
from illegal logging is
well over 2% of GDP
*Illegal logging has to
be halted, and forests
managed as a sustainable
source of revenue

PROPOSEDSTRA'I'EGIES &
MEASURES
.Increase capture of non-tax
revenues by improving
transparency in forestry
management
*Cancel illegal forestry
concession contracts
.Design and adopt forestry
law to strengthen forestry
monitoring mechanism

DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
See A5.

WORLD BANK GROUJP
PROGRAM
*SAC (FY00)
* ESAF/PRGF
*Forestry LIL (FY00)

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS
* Independent forest
monitoring in place: report
on violations by
concessionaires and others

COUNTRY PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
* Community forestry subdecree enacted by mid-2000
*Forestcode of practice adopted
*Concession performance
review by mid-2000
* National forest policy and
legislation by mid-2000
. Forest crime (infractions, fines,
penalties, prosecutions, seizures)
. revenues (royalties and export
tax receipts): collection of
royalties at S54/cubic meter
* No. of contractperformance
reviewscompleted; No. of
contracts cancelled/renegotiated
* harvestapprovalsfor
concessionaires

* Forests as % of value added
* Increased allocative
efficiency of public
expenditure to priority
sectors

AS. Strengthen legal
and institutional
framework for land
admin and
management
* proliferation of land
disputes; uncertain titling
and usage rights; unclear
land allocation policies

* Reduction in defense and
security spending
. Rationalization of civilian
expenditure and reorientation
to social sectors
* Strengthening public
expenditure management,
including budget planning and
execution

* Discuss, develop and test

revised land law and
regulations
* Improve security of land
tenure to address problems of
inadequate titling
* Establish coordinating body
for land administration

See A5.

* PER (FY99)
* SAC (FY00)
* Fiscal TA (FY01)
* PIR (FY01 )
* PSRL (FY02)
*Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (w/IMF)

* No. of civil service staff
trained in budget planning,
execution, monitoring
* Establishment of clear
Government financial
management processes
and procedures
* Medium-term
expenditure framework in
place
place

ADB1 UNWPF:
UNCOCHR,UNICEF, UNCHS,
FAO, Mekong River
Commission: Australia,
Finland,; Germany

*Land issues and policy note
(FY00) + support for
analytical work
* Landadministration
operation (FY01)

* Improved coordination
of land-related initiatives
* Recommendations for
land tenure/security
i Pilot land
titling/mapping
* Regular stakeholder
consultations

(GDP)
* Total expenditure against

budget target
. Allocation to priority sectors
(health, education, rural
agriculture)exceeds3.7percent
of GDP by 2002
o priority
s % cashdisbursement
sectors(budgetexecution)
* (see indicators on civil service
andmilitaiy
~~~~~reform
demobilization)
* EDC privatized or partnered
with foreign strategic partner on
incentive-based contract:
Financial condition of EDC
* Enactment and implementa-

tion of revised land law
* Establishment of land

administration institution
. Transparent land allocation
especially for demobilized
soldiers
* Adoption of land use
planning
* Reduced number and volume
of pending land disputes
*Increase in available farm land
and agricultural productivity
improvement

et
x

ISSUESAND PROBLEM | PROPOSEDSTRATEGIES&
MEAStJRES
DIAGNOSIS
Bl. Road Upgrading:
urgent need to improve
access to markets and
services:
.Most roads esp in rural
areas are totally
dilapidated; high
transport costs and travel
times.
* Disproportionate focus
on primary roads and
neglect of"missing link"
secondary toads
'Insufficient public
resources for road
construction and
maintenance
* Poor condition of road
hinders development
potential (agriculture,
fisheries, tourism, trade)
Min. of Public Works
and Transport have
inadequate capacity to
plan, manage and
implement road
construction
' No transport sector
policy

* Development of

comprehensive transport
policy, including financing,
maintenance, vehicle safety,
environmental safeguards
* Rehabilitationi and
maintenance of primary,
secondary and tertiary roads
* Support to local construction
industry (for maintenance)
' Establishment of a road fund
for maintenance

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS

WORLDBANKGROUP
PROGRAM
B. BUILDING INFRASTRUCTURE
SWAP
ADB, ILO,UNHCR, Australia,
.Road Rehabilitation Project
UNWFP,
(FY00)
France,Germany,Japan, New
*Transport Strategy (FY00),
Zealand, Sweden
.Road Sector Support
Operation (FY01 )
DEVELOPMENTPARTNERS

COUNTRY PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS

* Completion of SWAP

* Transport strategy adopted

sector strategy and
investment program by
end-2000
*Project-specific
infrastructure completed
within budget with secure
operation and maintenance
financing
.Planning and
management capacity of
relevant ministries and
agencies enhanced,
particularly at the local
level
* Sustainable maintenance
fund established
* SWAP-specific
indicators TBD, e.g.
-No, of local engineers
trained
-KM road construction by
2003 in different road
categories
-% reduction in travel time
between major provincial
cities by 2003
- % increase in motorized
traffic by 2003
-% increase in travel by
local people to district
centers and towns by 2003
-% increase in quantity of
cargo transported between
districts by 2003

stating clearly the ownership
and management roles for the
various classes of roads
* Increased coordination
between relevant Government
agencies (Ministry of Public
Works and Transport, Ministry
of Rural Development)
* New primary and secondary
roads constructed
* Adequate funding for
maintenance
*Growth of agriculture and
tourism sectors

-% decrease in cost of

_______________________________________________

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

travel
- % decrease in average
prices of goods in local
markets
*Beneficiary assessment
-% of benieficiaries in
lowest income quintile
-% of beneficiaries in
provinces with extreme
I

overty

a

ISSUES AND PROBLEM
DIAGNOSIS

B2. Water Supply and
coverage,
sanitation
Barring Phnom Penh, the
coverage by network
uitilities on the average is
only about 15 percent.
*Limited and unreliable
service as well as poor
quality of water
*Lack of competition
leading to exorbitant
prices to consumers

PROPOSED STRATEGIES &
MEASURES
* Improve the efficiency and

quality of water supply and
distribution services
* Enhance availability of
water for commercial and
industrial uses in rural/tourist
areas
* Establish an institutional
structure conducive to
management water over the
medium-term
* Design framework of laws
and regulations guiding
private and public
participation
* Develop and reinforce
technical expertise of rural
water supply authorities
* Restore and rehabilitate
water supply systems in rural
areas
* Open up the sector to a
variety of local demand-based
initiatives
' Monitor environmental
issues/water quality

WORLD BANK GROUP
PROGRAM

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS

COUNTRY PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS

.Water Policy (FY00),
.Sanitation Policy (FY00),
*Country Framework Report
on PPI (FY00), PPI
SeSminars(FYOO,01)
.Rural Infrastructure
Operation (FY02)

Short-term
. Training Program for
water supply authorities
designed; x staff trained in
rural and urban areas
* Legal and institutional
framework for private
participation in place
* Installation of x pumps
in priority rural districts
Medium-term
* Distances between rural
pumps and village
communities reduced 10%
. Number of legal
connections increased by
'
20% by 2002
* Water supply to rural
areas increased to I
million cubic peters per
year
* Water supply
availability from 12 hours
per day average in PP in
1999 increased to 16 hours
by 2002
* Water supply
availability in main
provincial towns increased
from x hours in 1999 to y
hours by 2002
*Beneficiary assessment

* Increased unit consumption
of water by user category,
based on metered consumption
* Increased percentage of
metering as a function of the
total number of connections
* Improved operating ratio
* 15% increase in availability
of safe water by 2003
* Improved health status:
decrease in prevalence of
diarrhea diseases by 10% by
2003
* Increased private investment
* Increased locational
diversification of private
investment

DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

ADB, UNCHR, UNWFP,
France, Japan, Sweden

-% of beneficiaries

in

lowest income quintile
-% of beneficiaries

*Lack of clear
institutional
responsibilities

*Establish and nurture an
institutional structure that is
conduciveto managing the
water sector,
*Regulate utilities to promote
accountability, and a basis for
"yardstick" competition.

in

provinces with extreme
poverty
* Responsibilities of
institutions agreed upon;
framework policy adopted
and implementation
initiated
__

* Regulatory body for private

sector participation established

><

ISStIESAND PROBLEM
DIAGNOSIS
B3. Limited Electricity
provision
*Electricity demands in
Cambodia is
concentrated in Phnom
Penh which accounts for
70% of the country's
electricity consumption
even though it accounts
for only 12% of the
population
* Framework needed for
public-private
participation and foreign
investment

&
PROPOSEDST'RATEGIES
MEASUtRES
* increase coverage and
reduce costs of electricity
supply
* establish rational tariff
structure
*Seek strategic partners in
order to increase and improve
services and improve financial
performance of utilities.
* Encourage competition and
private participation by
establishing an enabling
environmcnt
*Privatization and/or
concessioning of Electricite
de Cambodge (EDC)

B4. Shortage of incomeearning opportunities
in rural areas,
including farm and offfarm employment
*Need to raise incomes
of rural poor, including
landless.
. IProblemof limited
safety net/inadequate
resources for vulnerable
group
. Need to increase food
security

*Promote rural incomegeneration to diversify and
raise incomes of rural poor
.lncrease participation of
rural communities in
development. 'Decentralize
antipoverty interventions,
including consultative,
planning and decision-making
to local government
*Support the creation of
representative local
community -based institutions
. Identify alternate incomegenerating opportunities for
farmers and the landless
'Target resources to
vulnerable groups wherever
possible
*Promote income-earning
opportunities for women

DEVELOPMENTPARTNERS
ADB, France, Japan

AGRICULTURE/RURAL
DEVELOPMENT
ADB, EU, FAO,
UNDP,UNICEF, Australia,
France, Germany,
FORESTRY
ADB, FAO, UK
RESOURCES
NATURAL
ADB, FAO, UNDP,
UNESCO,EU, IDRC, IUCN,
Denmark, UK

WORLDBANKGROtUP
PROGRAM
*Rural electrification study
(FY00), Capacity-building
for Energy Authority, PPI
seminars, *Country
Framework Report for PPI
(FY00),
*Rural Electrification
Project (FY01)

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS
* Increased number of
wired poles/square meter
* Sustainable tariff
structure in place
. Higher rural
electrification ratio
* EDC financial position
improved through proper
incentives
*Beneficiary assessment
-% of beneficiaries in
lowest income quintile
-% of beneficiaries in
provinces with extreme
poverty

COUNTRYPERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
. Enactment of Electricity Act,
establishment of Energy
Authority, formulation and
establishment of regulatory
procedures, including for
competitive bidding.
* Development of rural
electrification strategy
* Increased number of private
suppliers
* More reliable services for
private sector; wider access to
basic services and utilities on
competitive terms
a EDC privatized or operated
by foreign strategic partners on
an incentive-based contract

*Agriculture Productivity
Improvement Project (FY97ongoing)
*NE Village Development
project (FY99-ongoing)
*Rural Infrastructure
(FY02);
*Cultural Heritage LIL
(FY02);
.Possible Agriculture
Diversification or support
for smallholders (FY03)

* Evaluation of existing

'Increased allocation and
decentralization of invcstment
budget expenditure to rural
areas
* Increased income of farmers
. Increased output
. Income diversification
*Narrowing of rural-urban
income gap
*Narrowing of gender income
gap

programs (IDA and other
partners)
*Increased beneficiary
and civil society
involvement in project
design and management
*% female beneficiaries of
rural income-generation
programs
'Beneficiary assessment
-% of beneficiaries in
lowest income quintile
-% of beneficiaries in
provinces with extreme
poverty
*Project-specific
indicators

I

l\

D

ISSUES AND PROBLEM

DIAGNOSIS
B5. Improve poverty
monitoring
*Lack of adequate and
consistent data on
income
*Several institutions
collect diflerent data
using ditfering
methodologies
.Two nationwide surveys
undertaken;
methodologies need to be
systematized.

PROPOSED STRA'I'ECIES &

MEASURES
*Maintain regular poverty
monitoring based on
continuous national multipurpose surveys.
*Build institutional capacity
for poverty analysis to enable
more effective policy
formulation

DEVELOPMENTr PARTNERS

ADB, UNDP, SIDA

C. HUMAN CAPITAL

____________

Cl. Improve health
outcomes of population,
esp. in rural areas
* High prevalence of
infectious diseases.
*High HIV/AIDS
prevalence

.Develop comprehensive
health sector strategy for the
medium-term
- Reduce prevalence of
infectious diseases, esp.
malaria, HIV/AIDS
* Provide more equitable
access to healthcare services,
esp. by the poor and in rural
areas

'Lack of essential drugs
.Weak, non cost
effective under funded
health system
*Poor targetry of public
sector services
*35% of income spent on
healthcare

* Ensure the availability of

essential drugs
* Improve efficiency of health
services delivery
' Build viable framework for
healthcare financing
' Build partnership with the
private sector

ADB, WHO, UNHCR,EU,
UNICEF, IOM, Australia,
Germany, France, Japan, UK

WORLD BANK GROtUP

PROGRAM
* Capacity-building in
poverty monitoring (FY0002)
. PSRP (annual)
. Participatory Poverty
Assessment (FY02)

SELF-EVALUATION

INDICATORS
. No. of staff trained in
poverty monitoring and
analysis
* Institution of regular
socioeconomic/living
standards measurement
surveys
* Consolidated databases
and stronger data integrity

DEVELOPMENT

SWAP
a Healthcare financing
(FY01)
*Health Sector Support
Operation (FY01)
* Essential Drugs LIL
(FY02)

* Development of

integrated healthcare
strategy and investment
plan with other
development partners
' Completion of
healthcare financing
analysis and
recommendations

* Improved training of
healthcare staff esp in
rural areas
* Streamlining of
healthcare staff esp. in
rural areas
' Increased resources to
communicable diseases
programs, esp. malaria
* Core package of quality
essential drugs available
in district health centers
* Framework for private
participation designed

COUNTRY PERFORMANCE

INDICATORS
* Clear institutional poverty

monitoring mechanism in place
* Timely availability of
comprehensive poverty data
'Better measurement of
development
outcomes/effectiveness of
development assistance

*Health service needs
identified and prioritised
* Annual improvement in per
capita contact rate with health
services (now 0.35)
. Availability, price and quality
of essential drugs

* Progress towards 100% cash

disbursement and utilization to
priority sectors (including
healthcare) under the budget
* Regulatory framework for
private provision of services
* 10% reduction in maternal
mortality rate by 2003
* 10 % reduction in infant
mortality rate by 2003
* 15% reduction in malaria
incidence by 2003
* 10 percent reduction in
healthcare costs to households
by 2003
.Rural poverty reduction

>

ISSUESAND PROBLEM
DIAGNOSIS
C2. Poor educational
outcomes at all levels.
*lligh repetition and
dropout rates
* High costs for poor
*Relatively low budget
allocations to education
*Higher education
institutions do not fulfill
the country's need for
highly skilled manpower
and potential leaders
* There are unexploited
synergies between
education and other
sectors.

PROPOSEDSTRATEGIES&
MEASIIRES
'Provide resources to schools
to improve the quality of
instruction
oPerformance based resource
management
oSupport exploratory work on
new curriculum modules or
innovations in teaching and
learning
eImprove the delivery of
higher education: build
leadership skills for the long
termn
*Improve mutually beneficial
linkages between education
and health, environment,
governance and social
development and cultural
heritage conservation
*Support development of
teacher training programs and

DEVELOPMENTPARTNERS
ADB, EU, UNDP, UNICEF,
UNESCO, UNHCR, Australia,
UK, France, Germany,Japan,
Netherlands, Russia, Sweden

revisions in terms of service

DI. Enabling
environment for private
sector activity needs to
be enhanced
.Inconsistent, and nontransparent legal
framework
*Absence of systematic
public-private dialogue;
prevalence of informal
"deal making"
*o3usinesssupport and
financial services underdeveloped : private sector
is inward looking.
*Financial sector is
shallow (M2/GDP 14%).
* Specific problems of
contract enforcement,
land and property rights

D. PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
SECTOR
FINANCIAL
*Improve confidence and
IMF, ADB,
transparency in public policy
RURALFINANCE
making and issues affecting
ADB, France
the private sector
PROGRAMS
SUPPORT
SPECIFIC
*Harmonize commercial and
ADB, EU, UNDP, UNIDO,
financial legislation. Plug
ILO, France, Germany, Japan
holes in legal and regulatory
code,
(commercial
framework
bankruptcy law) and
enforcement capacity
.Encourage direct govt.business dialogue and
formulation of business
associations
*Conduct assessment of small
scale private and informal
sectors and existing
services/donor programs as a
basis for designing support
mechanisms

WORLDBANKGROUP
PROGRAM
*Education Quality LIL
(FY00)
*Higher Education
Operation (FY01)
* Basic Education Operation
(FY03 )-can include
(component on history,
cultural heritage assets,
interpretation and
stewardship; traditional
crafts; vemacular
architecture; education of
conservation specialists)

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS
* Indicators to be
developed by Education
Sector Review
* Well-coordinated donor
support of main activities
* Increase in average years
of schooling for those
school clusters supported
by IDA programs
* Higher education
financing model
developed
a Higher education quality
standards developed
* Other project-specific
indicators
*Beneficiary assessment
-% of beneficiaries in
lowest income quintile
-% of beneficiaries in
provinces with extreme

COUNTRYPERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
*Development ofteacher
quality and professional
standards
* Increased net enrollment rates
* Share of girls and boys
completing 6 years of school
* Public awareness of Khmer
history, social and economic
value of culture

poverty

and RURAL INCOME GENERATION
oEstablishment of regular
. PSRP (annual)
forum for public-private
* Legal SWAP
sector dialogue
* IFC/MPDF support
* Establishment of
* IFC investments
business associations,
* IFC/MIGA/
including those
FIAS support for improving
representing the interests
the investment climate
of SMEs
* IFC policy advice on
* Leasing framework in
privatization (demandplace
driven)
* Volume of applications
for IFC equity
participation
* (see also Legal SWAP)

*Revised legislation or
regulations
*Increased value added of
private sector: increased
growth of manufacturing (e.g.
light industry) and services
. Increased investment
* Increased FDI
a Diversification and
exploitation of sources of
growth
* Transparent privatization of
SOEs and utilities

ISSUlESAND PROBLEM
DIAGNOSIS
* About 100 state-owned

PROPOSED STRATEGIES &
MEASUJRES
* Encourage microfinance

enterprises, including
utilities,
.Receiving budget
support
* Need to devclop
business skills,
particularly for small and
medium-enterprises

institutions, including
transformation to viable
commercial banks
* Develop strategy for
privatization of remaining
SOEs, particularly utilities.
* Training/technical assistance
for small businesses

D3. Need to promote
private participation in
infrastructure
*The public sector lacks
both the resources and
capacity to provide
necessary infrastructure
for PSD

*Develop overall strategy for
PPI (multi-sectoral) in
Cambodia and get agreement
on a time-bound action plan
for regulatory framework and
establishing appropriate
regulatory bodies,

DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

WORLD BANK GROtlP
PROGRAM
I FC/MPDF TA

SELF-EVALUATION
INDICATORS
* Level of demand for

COtJNTRY PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS

services
* Enhanced business
planning capability,

* Framework for PPI in place.
* Increased private investment

* Workshops to discuss

cross-cutting issues arising
from sectoral studies and
best practices elsewhere in
PPI, followed by TA to
develop regulatory
framework/capacity
(beginning in water, energy)
* Country Framework Paper
(CFR) for PPI

* Increased locational
diversification of private
investment

u

* IFC capacity-building

* Need for better
management and
protection of cultural
resources as a potential
source of growth and
income for rural
communities
*Unique cultural
heritage threatened by
decades of violent
conflict and political
instability,
Potential source of
growth (culture tourism,
esp. in Siem Reap area)
*Widespread looting and
illegal exports; pressure
from unregulated
development; problems
of access; lack of
management capacity

*Lay toundations for
sustainable management of
cultural heritage assets.
*Build public sector capacity
to plan cultural resource
management at national level.
* Support community-based
tourism development
* Improve access
*Enhance inter-agency
coordination and regulatory
framework to promote publicprivate partnerships in cultural
tourism

*Cultural resource
management LIL (FY02)
(e.g. Community-based
cultural tourism in the
provinces of Siem Reap,
Kampong Thom and Preah
Vihea)
* IFC Tourism investment
and TA (FY00)

*Adoption of publicprivate, governmentcommunity /civil society
partnerships for cultural

oHeritage conservation
program implemented
*Tourism revenues increase
*Social capital enhancement
Improve rural revenue
'Create income generating
activities from community
based tourism

- 51 -

Annex 10

CAS SUMMARYOFDEVELOPMENTPRIORITIES

Networkarea

Country
Performance/a

Major Issue

Country
Priority

Bank Group Reconciliationof country
Priority
and BankGroup priorities

Rural poverty
Structuralreforms;
fiscal sustainability
Public administration
reformand military
demobilization
Girls' education;
women's health
status;women's
representation;

High
High

High
High

High

High

Moderate

High

Girls education
Maternaland child
mortality;
HIV/AIDS,malaria,
TB; low staff skill
levels
Virtualabsenceof
safetynets;reliance
on informaltransfers

High
High

High
High

PovertyReduction& Economic
Management
PovertyReduction
EconomicPolicy

Fair
Fair

Public Sector

Poor

Gender

Poor

Policydialogue;focus on
education;many other
donorsand NGOs active

HumanDevelopment
Department
Education
Health,Nutrition

Fair
Fair

SocialProtection

Poor

Moderate Moderate

Povertyreductionhighest
priority,but needfor
bettertargetingof
vulnerablegroups

Environmentally& Socially
SustainableDevelopment
Rural development

Poor

Environment

Poor

Socialdevelopment
Finance,PrivateSector&
Infrastructure

Fair

FinancialSector

Fair

Private Sector

Good

Otherinfrastructure

Poor

Rural infrastructure; Moderate Moderate
rural incomegeneration;provincial
administrationand
capacity-building
Forestry(control of
High
High
illegallogging);
protectedareas
Participation
Moderate Moderate
Moderate Moderate
Strengthenregulatory
framework
Legaland regulatory Moderate High
transparency;privatepublicpartnerships
Poor
High
High

Policy dialogue,capacitybuilding;partnerships

a. Use "excellent", "good", "fair" or "poor"
b. Indicateprincipal country-specificproblems (e.g. for poverty reduction "rural poverty", for education "female secondary education", for
environment"urban air pollution")
c. To indicatepriority use "low", "moderate", or "high"
d. Give explanation, if prioritiesdo not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

ANALYTICAL ANNEXES

- 52

-

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ANNEX A.

POVERTY PROFILE .................................................

53

ANNEX B.

GENDER PROFILE .................................................

55

ANNEX C.

LAND, LIVING CONDITIONS AND VULNERABILITY IN CAMBODIA:
CONSULTATIONS WITH POOR COMMUNITIES .................................................

61

ANNEX D.

DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS .................................................

79

ANNEX E.

PRIVATE SECTOR ASSESSMENT: BROAD OVERVIEW .................................................

85

ANNEX F.

PORTFOLIO AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ISSUES .................................................

99

ANNEX G.

CAS CONSULTATIONS AND CLIENT FEEDBACK SURVEY

.

....................... 104-111

- 53 -

ANNEX A. POVERTYPROFILE
Poverty Profile

* According to the Cambodia Poverty Assessment (FY00), based on the 1997 socioeconomic survey,
thirty-six percent of the population of Cambodia live below the poverty line, down from 39 percent in
1993/94.On a regional basis, poverty incidence declined in this period in secondary cities (from 37 to
30 percent), and moderately in rural areas (from 43 to 40 percent), and remained at 11 percent in
Phnom Penh. Rural households thus account for almost 90 percent of Cambodia's poor.
* The highest poverty rate, 44 percent, is found among households headed by farmers. Conversely,
households headed by government officials have a poverty rate of 18 percent.
• Poverty rates are high for households in which the head of the household has had either no formal
education (42 percent) or only some primary schooling (40 percent). These two groups account for
four-fifths of the poor. The prevalence of poverty among households in which the head had
completed lower and higher secondary education falls to 24 percent and 12 percent respectively.
* The incidence of poverty averages 33 percent in female-headed households, compared with 37
percent in male-headed households.
* Inequality is consistently higher in Phnom Penh (Gini=0.46), declines in other urban areas
(Gini=0.44) and is lowest in rural areas (Gini=0.33). However, total inequality (Gini=0.42) is higher
than in most other countries in Asia at similar levels of economic development.
Key Issues
* Improving regional growth and income distribution.. Despite its pervasiveness, poverty in
Cambodia is relatively shallow, suggesting great scope for poverty reduction through rapid growth.
Income poverty rates could be cut by as much as 50 percent by 2005 if Cambodia is able to achieve
and maintain annual average growth rates of 6 percent. But such gains would depend on the pattern of
growth. Growth in 1993-96 was unbalanced, centered in Phnom Penh and other urban areas, driven
by reconstruction efforts and boosted by tourism. In contrast, growth of rural activities and agriculture
lagged behind, averaging less than 3 percent in 1991-96. If growth continues to be strongly urban
focused, then rural poverty is likely to remain high, especially as the depth of poverty is greater in
rural areas.
* Improving access to public/social services. Currently, the poor have relatively limited access to
public services. For example, while 17 percent of people in the richest consumption quintile have
access to piped water, only 4 percent in the poorest quintile do. In rural areas, the poorest quintile has
net primary enrollment of 50 percent, compared to 75 percent for the richest quintile. Less than 5
percent of children aged 12-14 in the poorest quintile are enrolled in lower secondary schools, but 25
percent in the richest quintile are. About 21 percent of people in the poorest quintile have to travel
more than 5 km to reach a health clinic; only 14 percent in the richest quintile have to travel that far.
Almost 20 percent of the richest rural quintile have access to publicly-provided electric lighting,
under 1 percent in the poorest quintile receive the same service.
* The poor are disproportionately burdened by the costs of education and health services. In general,
households finance about 40 percent of education costs, the balance made up by donors/NGOs (40
percent) and government (20 percent). The cost of one child in primary school takes up a quarter of
all non-food spending per capita in the poorest quintile, while a child in lower secondary school takes
57 percent of non-food spending. Households finance 82 percent of healthcare expenditure, donors
and NGOs 14 percent, and the government about 4 percent. Poor households experience the highest
out-of-pocket costs; wealthier households are more likely to benefit from fee exemptions at public
facilities.
* Improving resource allocation and safety net provision for vulnerable groups. Particularly
vulnerable groups in Cambodia include internally-displaced people and returned refugees; war
widows, orphans and child combatants; people disabled during the wars and by land mines-one in

- 54 -

every 250 Cambodians is disabled. The proportion of amputees-one in every 384 people-is the
highest in the world. Access to land and housing are key constraints for these vulnerable groups, as
well as for some ethnic minorities (Cham, Khmer Loeu).
• The formal social safety net is extremely limited. Much of the small budget of the Ministry of Social
Affairs, Labor, Vocational Training and Youth Rehabilitation (MOSALVY)which is responsible for
vulnerable groups, goes to pensions for public servants, assistance programs for widows and orphans
and a rehabilitation program for about 1,000 families that come to Phnom Penh ever year to return to
their original homes, usually in the countryside. Assistance for people with disabilities comes mainly
from NGOs. However, current programs reach only a small number of those needing assistance,
leaving significant needs unmet. There is also limited analysis of the cost effectiveness of assistance
programs. The poor and vulnerable rely largely on informal transfers.
* Improving access to land and housing. (see Annex C).
* Reorientingpublic expenditure to the social sectors. Public expenditure on health and education and
other social services has been extremely low and crowded out by defense expenditure. Spending on
defense and security increased from 32 percent of the total in 1996 to 47 percent in 1998 in the wake
of the July 1997 events; spending on health and education declined in this period from 21 percent to
13 percent. Public expenditure on social services is almost entirely donor financed. For example,
spending on primary education, from the government's own resources, was less than 0.5 percent of
GDP in 1997.
Policy Implications'

* Government policies and associated donor assistance should mainly target the rural population.
* Policies aimed at reducing poverty by enhancing income-generating capacity should be targeted
towards the agricultural sector.
* Because three-quarters of the poor are self-employed, policies designed to make markets more
efficient (particularly for agricultural commodities, inputs and rural credit) will be particularly useful.
* Raising educational attainment (secondary as well as primary) is clearly an effective poverty
alleviation intervention. Demand-side interventions are essential, in particular reducing the relative
costs of schooling for the poor, for example through scholarships and textbook programs; and
reducing out-of-pocket costs of health services for the poor, including a transparent system of fee
exemptions.
* Greater gender sensitivity in social policy is desirable, by promoting greater access for women to
health, education and the markets.
* Poverty monitoring needs to be systematized. Key indicators recommended by the Poverty
Assessment (FY00) are as follows: Aggregate: poverty headcount index by region and household
head and occupation; gross and net primary and secondary school enrollment; number of outpatient
healthcare visits per 1,000 people, number of hospital admissions; and Household: floor area per
household member, distance to the main source of drinking water, household's main source of
lighting, household's main source of drinking water, toilet located in dwelling, use of fuel other than
firewood, dwelling materials; value of land owned, value of outstanding loans, households main
source of income in the previous 12 months (other than agriculture), household ownership of a
motorbike, scooter or TV set.
Poverty Alleviation Objectives of the CAS
* Promoting poverty-reducing growth by supporting macroeconomic stabilization, an enabling
environment for private business, and reforms in governance.
* Upgrading rural infrastructure: energy, water supply, roads
* Investing in health and education services, focusing on demand-side interventions
* Improving poverty monitoring
* Creating opportunities for the poor: rural development, improving agricultural services and facilities
(marketing, distribution, credit)
* Community-based environmental and cultural resource management initiatives

See Cambodia Poverty Assessment (FYOO)

- 55 ANNEX B. GENDER PROFILE
Gender Context

1.
Cambodia is a hierarchically ordered society with power and status conditioning social relations.
In this social order, women are considered to be of lower status to men, although the status of an
individual is also determined by age and other characteristics. Women are nominally guaranteed equal
rights with men in the Cambodian Constitution. The ability to claim these rights, however, is subject to
prevailing social ideals and attitudes about power and gender relations. In addition, women in Cambodia
suffer from the consequences of social disintegration: many of them are widows and/or single household
heads providing sole support for their families. Conflict during the last two decades has also left the
country with many more adult women than men. This demographic imbalance gives women more
responsibilities in a context that is more disadvantageouscompared to other countries.
2. Government-ledefforts for the advancement of women include the following:
*

On 22 September 1992, the Supreme National Council of Cambodia (SNC) signed the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). This Convention is
intended to remove barriers to women as individuals and to ensure their full participation in national
life and development. A formal mechanism for monitoring the implementation of CEDAW is not yet
in place, however (UNICEF, 1998).
* From 1979 to the 1993 elections, the Women's Association of Cambodia (WAC), a nationwide
government organization, was the institution in charge of protecting women's interests. The WAC
had staff at every level of the administration structure down to the village level and representatives in
all government workplaces (UNICEF, 1998).
* The government upgraded the State Secretariat for Women's Affairs (established in 1993) to be the
Ministry of Women's Affairs in 1995, and subsequently as the Ministry of Women's and Veteran's
Affairs (MOWVA) in 1998.
* The Constitution of 1993 has several progressive provisions with respect to the rights of women:The
Constitution provides the framework for gender equality including the equal rights of men and
women. before the law, equal participation in political, economic, social and cultural life, equality in
marriage and the family, employment and pay. The Constitution also contains a progressive assertion
that work in the home should be valued as much as work outside the home (Article 36).
Discrimination against and the exploitation of women is to be abolished. Based on this framework, a
Women's Code and National Policy for Women were written in 1994, but these have not been
endorsedyet (Gorman, 1999).
3.
However, despite these efforts, women are still seriously underrepresented at the level of national
decision-making, as in many countries. Nationally, women comprise only 10 percent of all elected
leaders, including those at provincial and village levels (MoWVA, October 1999). In the 1993-1997
government, five percent were women (six percent after various reshuffles). There were no women
ministers and only five under-secretaries of state (two for MoWVA) (Bureau of Democracy, Human
Rights and Labor, 1999; Gorman, 1999). However, in the recently-formed government, for the first time,
women are represented at the ministerial level. Following the elections in November 1998, there are two
women ministers among the twenty-five ministries (Ministry of Women's and Veteran's Affairs; Ministry
.of Culture and Fine Arts) and four Secretaries of State out of fifty (Ministry of Women's and Veteran's
Affairs (two); Ministry of Justice; Ministry of Labor, Vocational Training and Rehabilitation). Out of the
122 members of the National Assembly, ten are women.
4. The National Assembly has passed several laws relating to women's rights recently.
* In November 1997, in an effort to curb Cambodia's high maternal mortality rate, the government
modified its highly restrictive national law on abortion. Abortion is now available during the first 14
weeks of pregnancy without restriction as to reason. Previously, abortion had been permitted only to
save a woman's life (Abortion Laws, 1999)

-

56 -

* The 1997 Labor Code, which went into effect on 3 April 1997, protects women and children from
working in 'dangerous' occupations (Article 177) and offers special protection to women who work
during pregnancy (Ministry of Planning (MOP), 1998).
* Cambodian inheritance laws allow both sons and daughters to inherit parental property and land.
Cambodian law also recognizes that men and women bring property into a marriage and can take
property out of the marriage if there is a dissolution (Ministry of Planning, 1998).
* A law on trafficking, which provides for heavier punishment if the victims of trafficking are below 15
years of age, is currently in the legislative process, and a law on domestic violence is being proposed
(MOP, 1998).
* More recently, a large number of women's NGOs have emerged in the country. They have
concentrated on training poor women and widows, and on addressing social problems such as
domestic violence and prostitution. NGOs have also been supporting gender concerns and the
development of women in urban areas (particularly Phnom Penh) and there has been a marked
increase in the growth of gender-focused activities in recent years. At least 24 local NGOs are
presently working in the gender area in Phnom Penh, including Urban Poor Women's Development;
Solidarity for the Urban Poor Federation, Urban Poor Development Fund; Urban Sector Group; and
Community Sanitation and Waste Recycling Organization focus on urban poor and water, sanitation
and housing issues with particular respect to women. NGOs such as the Cambodian Women's Crisis
Centre, Project Against Domestic Violence and Khemara focus on social development issues.
Table 1: Social and Economic Indicators
Indicator
Total
Female
Male
Population (1998)
11,437,656
52 percent
48 percent
Fertility rate (1997)
4.6
Life expectancy (1 997)
54.5
58.6 years
50.3 years
Matemal mortality rate (1997)
473/100,000 live births
Infant mortality rate* (1998)
89.4/1,000 live births
Child malnutrition (1998) %
49.3 (under 5 years)
Adult literacy rate (1997) %
55.3
78.5
School enrolment (1998) %
Gross primary
89.7
83.9
Net primary
78.3
74.1
Gross lower secondary
23.0
16.1
Net lower secondary
14.2
11.I
Gross upper secondary
8.7
6.0
Net upper secondary
6.4
4.8
Share of economically-active population (1997) %
100.0
52.0
48.0
Share of adult labor force (1997) %
100.0
53.0
47.0
Ratio of female to male wage (1997)
1.33
Number of Ministers (1998)
25
2
23
Number of Secretaries of State (1998)
50
4
45
Number of the National Assembly members (1998)
122
10
112
Sources: * Cambodia General Census 1998,(Ministry of Planning; Poverty Assessment(FY00); Socioeconomic
Survey (1900)

Social Indicators
* In 1998, the population was approximately 11.4 million with a larger ratio of females (52 percent)
than males (48 percent) (Cambodia General Census, MOP,1998).
* The fertility rate is quite high in Cambodia (4.6 in 1997) comparing to other neighboring countries
with similar GDP per capita, such as Vietnam (2.4 in 1997) and Philippines (3.6 in 1997) except for
Lao PDR (5.6 in 1997) (World Bank, 1998).
* In 1997, the life expectancy of women at birth was 58.4 years, compared to 53 years for men (MOP,
1998).
* Cambodian women suffer specifically from reproductive health-related problems.Maternal mortality
was 473 per 100,000 live births and infant mortality rate was 89.4 per 1,000 live births in 1998
(Ministry of Health, 1998), resulting from poor access to and utilization of maternal health services,
low-quality health facilities, and insufficient access to birth-spacing information, supplies and

- 57 -

*

*

*

*

*

services. Most births take place at home and only a third are attended by a trained health professional
(Gorman, 1999).
Results of a baseline survey conducted in 1998 indicate that knowledge of fertility is very low among
women. The demand for family planning information is great with more than 85 percent of the
respondents indicating a desire to learn more. About 20 percent of the women were using some form
of family planning or birth spacing with contraceptive injections the most commonly-used
(UNICEF/UNWFP, 1998). However, access to birth family planning services is still limited and there
is evidence of a large unmet need for contraception, with an estimated 78 percent of Cambodian
couples of reproductive age being interested in birth control or spacing but being unable to do so
owing to an inadequate supply of contraceptives. The poor availability of contraceptive options also
means that many Cambodian women use traditional and dangerous methods when they want to
terminate an unplanned pregnancy. Induced abortions by such methods are a leading cause of
maternal mortality in Cambodia (UNDP, 1998).
The child malnutrition rate is also quite high in the country. In 1998,49.3 percent of all children
under 5 years old of age were moderately or severely underweight (Ministry of Health, 1998),
although there is little parental discrimination against female children in the allocation of food,
resulting in few gender differences in nutritional outcomes (Ministry of Planning, 1998). The high
incidence of child malnutrition causes stunting which can have particularly severe consequences for
women because of their childbearing role.
Sexually-transmitted diseases (STDs) pose another reproductive health risk that affects women. The
incidence of STDs has been growing in Cambodia, and the rate of HIV infection has been increasing
at an alarming rate. This will place an increasing burden on the health-care system. Four percent of
Cambodia's adult population is HIV positive.
Available statistics have shown significant gender disparities in female educationaloutcomes. Adult
literacy rates are considerably lower among women than men with the rates of 55 percent and 79
percent for females and males respectively in 1997 (Ministry of Planning, 1998). The gender gap is
narrower among the younger generation, reflecting increased access to schooling in recent years.
Girls are underrepresented in formal education at all levels. Whereas boys and girls enroll in school in
equal numbers, girls tend to drop out in larger numbers than boys and the gender gap increases as the
level of schooling rises as shown in Table 1. Reasons for the gender gap in education are related
primarily to two areas, firstly costs, both direct costs and opportunity costs and, secondly, social
attitudes towards gender roles. Girls are expected to carry out domestic chores in the home and are
additionally more involved in income-generating activities. This means that a girl's labor is more
important to the household and render the opportunity costs of sending her to school higher than those
of boys (Gorman, 1999).

Economic Indicators
*

Women's share of the economically active population is 52 percent (MOP, 1998), and women
constitute 53 percent of the adult labor force - more than in any other Southeast Asian country
(UNDP, 1998). The vast majority of economically-active men and women in Cambodia are farmers
or fishermen. Women are much more likely than men to be service workers, and to be self-employed.
Only 3.9 percent of economically-activewomen, but 14 percent of men, work for the govemment and
for state-owned enterprises (MOP, 1998).
* Although women form a majority of the current labor force, they enter the labor market with fewer
educationalqualifications and skills than men. Women's lack of formal education directly impacts on
their representation in the labor market. Where women form a majority in the labor market it is in
insecure positions requiring few formal qualificationsand skills (Gorman, 1999).
* Despite their high rates of economic activity, in most major occupations, the earnings of Cambodian
men are greater than those of Cambodian women. On average, male earnings are 33 percent higher
than female earnings after controlling for experience (as represented by an individual's age) and
education. The largest wage differences (75 percent) occurs among young workers aged 15-29 years

- 58 -

with no schooling, while the smallest wage difference occurs among workers age 30-39 years with
lower secondary schooling (MOP, 1998), indicating wage discrimination against women in the
Cambodian labor markets.
Key Issues and Disadvantaged Groups
Sexually Exploited Women and Children: Prostitution, Trafficking in Women, Prevalence of
HIV/AIDS.
* Cambodia is believed to have the highest HIV infection rate in Asia, with 50 to 70 persons believed to
catch the virus everyday. The HIV/AIDS Control Center estimates that 150,000Cambodians - nearly
4 percent of the population aged 15-49- are HIV-positive (UTNAIDS,1998). Cambodia's flourishing
sex industry2 and a low-level of HIV awareness have been blamed for the rapid spread of the virus
(AIDS Weekly Plus, 1999).
* Sex workers face many health nsks, especially HIV/AIDS and STDs. The numbers of HIV-infected
commercial sex workers has increased3 and the average age of sex workers has decreased reflecting in
part the preference for virgins who are free of HIV.
* They are particularly vulnerable because as women and as service-providers they lack the power to
negotiate sexual relations with their clients. They are frequently physically abused by clients and
owners of brothels (Gorman, 1999);
* Cross-border trafficking and illegal migration from Cambodia to Thailand is widespread although no
statistics are available. The greatest part of the trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation takes
place within the country, but a large number of Cambodian children are also trafficked into Thailand
and many Vietnamese young girls are trafficked into Cambodia (MOP, 1998);
* Many women are forced into prostitution out of economic necessity and a significant proportion are
reportedly sold or tricked into the profession. Conditions of poverty, social upheaval, and
underdeveloped legal infrastructure and weak law enforcement are contributing to the rapid growth of
the sex industry (PADV, 1995; UNICEF, 1996). Without the creation of altemative and sustainable
forms of employment, poor and uneducated rural women will likely continue to be drawn into the
profession.
* Female-headed Households
* A quarter of households in Cambodia are headed by women, including war widows, divorcees and
women abandoned by their husbands. They make up the poorest of Cambodia's poor,4 and are
marginalized not just economically but socially (Boyce, 1999);
* Most survive by subsistence farming. Too poor to own oxen for tilling the fields, these women will
often work for other farmers, then borrow the draught animals as payment in order to plant their own
rice. But by the time these women put in their own rice seedlings, it is late in the growing season and
the resulting crop will not be enough to feed their family, let alone to sell in the market for profit
(Boyce, 1999);
* In urban areas, where female-headed households often do not have an extended family or social
network, they are more likely to fall into severe poverty. For some women, the only options are
begging or prostitution (Boyce, 1999).
Landless/near landless women in rural areas (see Annex C).
Domestic violence against women
* Recent studies have reported that domestic violence in Cambodia is widespread. The level of violence
is extremely high, and it occurs across socio-economic classes and in rural areas as well as in urban

There are estimated 15-20,000 direct sex workers and 20-25,000 indirect sex workers such as dancing girls, masseurs, and beer promoting girls.
Of these, at least 35 percent are minors, under the age of 18 years old (Leng, 1998).
3It is estimated that approximately 42 peTcent of commercial sex workeTsare HIV-infected (AIDS Weekly Plus, 1999).
4A third of them live below the poverty line (UNDP, 1998).
2

-

59

-

areas. However, domestic violence is still not recognized as a crime and is, therefore, seldom reported
to the police (Project Against Domestic Violence (PADV), 1995);
* Alcohol, poverty, gambling, family squabbles, lack of education, and political/social unrest contribute
to domestic violence, but sexism, culture, social morals and traditional public attitudes also cause
and perpetuate domestic violence (PADV, 1995).
* In a country where violence has prevailed for decades, where the rule of law and the judicial system
are weak, and where weapons are widely available, many private conflicts over women, money or
other domestic problems are often solved in the most violent way (UNICEF, 1996).
Female Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)
* Many people have been displaced as a result of armed conflict. Between 1992 and 1993, in addition
to the 370,000 refugees repatriated from the Thai border camps to Cambodia, another 180,000IDPs
were returned to their place of origin (UNICEF, 1996).
• A large proportion were female heads of household with children. Most of these womenhave become
highly vulnerable to destitution and chronic displacement. They lack appropriate skills, receive hardly
any material or moral support, and were often by-passed by self-help schemes (which involve heavy
manual work) (UNICEF, 1996).
Women with Disabilities
E It is estimated that, in Cambodia, disabled people represent 2 percent of the total population of which
21 percent are children and 34 percent are females (IJNICEF, 1996).5 Social prejudice towards
disabled people is widespread. Women with disabilities are usually less visible than men with
disabilities since they often hide, especially when they are young. For single disabled women, the
chances of getting married are very slim. Married women who become disabled have a higher chance
of being abandoned by their husbands than the other way around. It is likely that these women face
both gender and disability discrimination (Elwan, 1999;UNICEF, 1996).

However, information on conflict-related disability is difficultto come by and estimates can be very unreliable.

-

60 -

References
Abortion laws in the post-Cairo world-changesand recommendations for Action, 1999.'Abortion laws in
the Post-Cairo World-Changesand recommendationsfor Action.'
AIDS Weekly Plus, March 8, 1999. 'Education and prevention-anti-AIDS program to be expanded
throughout Cambodia.'
Boyce, Debra, 1999. 'Rights-Cambodia: Women weighed down by poverty, social stigma.' InInterpress
Service, May 3, 1999.
Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 1999. 'Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for
1998.' February 26, 1999.
Elwan Ann, 1999. 'Poverty and disability: a background paper for the World Development Report
(draft).' Washington, DC: World Bank.
Gorman, Siobhan, 1999. Gender and development in Cambodia: an Overview. Cambodia Development
Resource Institute, 1999.
Kusakabe, Kyoko, Wang Yunxian and Govind Kelkar, 1995. 'Women and land rights in Cambodia,'
Economic and Political Weekly, October 28: 87-92, 1995.
Leng, HOTBun, 1998. 'Cambodia,' in Tim Brown, et al. (eds.) Sexually transmitted diseases in Asia and
the Pacific, Australia: Venereology.
MOH, Net Health Survey, 1998 (1999)
MoP (Ministry of Planning), Kingdom of Cambodia, 1998. Cambodia Human Development Report:
Women's contribution to development. Phnom Penh, Cambodia General Census, 1998.
MoWVA (Ministry of Women's and Veterans' Affairs, October 1999. Building Together - Towards
Achieving Gender Equity and Social Development. Phnom Penh
PADV (Project Against Domestic Violence), 1995.Plates in a basket will rattle: Domestic violence in
Cambodia: a summary. Phnom Penh: Project Against Domestic Violence.
IUNAIDS,1998. Report on the Global HI V/AIDS epidemic.
IJNDP, 1998,Human Development Report.
UNICEF, 1996. Towards a better future: An analysis of the situation of children and women in
Cambodia. Bangkok: UNICEF Phnom Penh.
UNICEF/UNWFP, 1998. Report on the Cambodian 1998joint UNICEF-WFP baseline survey of CASD
project and WFP target areas.
World Bank, 1998. World DevelopmentIndicators Washington,DC.

- 61 ANNEX

C. LAND, LIVING CONDITIONS AND VULNERABILITY IN CAMBODIA: CONSULTATIONS
WITH POOR COMMUNITIES

INTRODUCTION

1.
Poverty eradication and meeting the basic needs of vulnerable groups are the principal challenges
facing Cambodia at this juncture in its development. The following work undertaken on poverty and
vulnerable groups identifies access to rural land, and urban land and housing issues as major cross-cutting
factors directly implicated in the factors leading to, and reinforcing, poverty and vulnerability.
METHODOLOGY

2.
This report contains a summary of the findings of work undertaken in August-September 1999 on
major vulnerable rural and urban groups, focusing on land and housing issues. The work was designed
using the participatory methodology of focus group discussions with select communities in rural and
urban poor areas. In rural areas, these included: (a) communities with members that do not own land,
(either because they have sold it, or due to their status as returnees and internally displaced person); (b)
communities that have limited areas available for cultivation; and (c) communities that were previously
landless or land poor but have benefited from recent land allocation by the government. Communities
consulted in urban areas included: a long established squatter community in existence for more than 5
years; a newly established squatter settlement consisting of recently arrived households (either through
eviction from other urban settlements or new rural to urban migrants); anda legal settlement consisting of
households evicted from other areas and relocated with the support of the authorities.
3.
The information obtained from the consultations was supplemented by data obtained from
interviews conducted with key respondents consisting of local leaders, development workers and
government officials. Supplementary data was also obtained from a variety of documentary sources.
4.
The areas for the focus group consultations were selected on the basis of geographical diversity, a
high concentration of returnees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) and where there were reports on
land disputes and conflicts. Besides work in Phnom Penh, fieldwork was conducted in Banteay,
Battambang, Meanchey, Siem Reap, Kampong Cham, Kandal, Takeo, Prey Veng and Kampong Speu
covering eight provinces. Discussions were conducted with 22 communities in all, with some discussions
conducted with mixed groups of men and women, and other discussions conducted solely with women to
bring out more clearly the gender dimensions of vulnerability.
5.
Discussions were guided by a set of issues and questions that were pre-tested to ensure that they
were clearly formulated and well understood by the communities taking part. In each community,
participants were initially asked to take part in a community mapping exercise on the demographic and
socio-economic characteristics of the group, and the basic facilities and infrastructure of the settlement.
This was followed by focused discussion on the situation with regard to access to land for the rural groups
and on land and housing issues for the urban groups. Information was sought on three phases in the
development of the community - the recent past, present and future in relation to land and housing issues.
For example, what were the main causes of the loss of land for the rural poor? How did urban squatters
end up in the squatter settlement? What were the conditions of tenure/occupancyof landless and squatter
groups and how vulnerable were they? What are the coping strategies/safety nets used by the
communities to reduce vulnerability and increase stability and security?Have the communities been able
to organize themselves to improve their access to land/housing?Who are the major outside actors that
have an impact on improving the occupancy/accessto land and housing of the communities? What has
been the role of the government and the private sector in addressing their main needs, including access to
basic services for the squatters, and access to resources for the rural landless. What type of assistance
have the communitiesreceived to resolve their lack of access to land/housing?

- 62 6.
A final set of questions related to the perceptions of the groupsregarding the future. Did these
groups perceive that their access to land and housing can be improved, and if so, how? Did they expect
that the government will help them? What do they see are likely to be the main mechanisms that would
be effective in reducing their vulnerability in land and housing?
7.
In addition, two workshops for urban poor community leaders were organized in Phnom Penh on
26 August and 27 September 1999to elicit views on urban land and housing issues6 and the availability of
community level safety nets. This report has also benefited from the UN World Food Program (WFP)'s
study on vulnerability and poverty mapping and Oxfam-GB's Cambodia Land Study Project.
FINDINGS

Rural Communities and Land
8.
Most rural families consulted reported owning land areas of less that one hectare. The data
collected shows a skewed distribution of land ownership with a small proportion of households (about 10
per cent) said to be owning substantial tracts of land while a large proportion of households own small
sized areas of land. About 10 per cent of respondents reported that they owned no land. The uneven land
ownership distribution is mirrored by disparities in the size of agricultural land operations. Although
most respondents reported that they were engaged in rice production (nationally, it is estimated that about
85-90 percent of cultivated area is under rice production) many households said that food, i.e., rice
insecurity was a major problem. While food insecurity stems from a number of factors including low
productivity or crop failure due to natural disasters, an increasingly important factor appears to be the
small average size of land holdings.
9.
The disparities in agricultural land ownership and operation, and the presence of a substantial
landless or small land owning and farming group, appear to be increasing for a number of reasons.They
include:
• population growth and the fragmentation or subdivision of land ownership and land operation;
* land sales especially by poorer farmers to meet debts or other needs. Many of these farmers are
unable to obtain credit and have few or no other assets. According to the estimates of land sales
provided in the discussions, as much as 10 percent of total reported agricultural land had been sold
by participants during the past eighteen months to raise cash;
* reported usurpation of the land of poor rural communities by influential officials and business groups
or individuals. Forced sales, expulsions and other kinds of land grabbing are a problem in the
northwest, in areas desired for concessions, or in areas with significant economic development or
tourism activities. This land displacement tendency is especially discernible in Kampong Speu, Siem
Reap, Sihanoukville and Kandal provinces and Phnom Penh;
* failure of government efforts to implement land titling and ensure a higher degree of land security for
vulnerable communities. Reasons offered include instances of corruption and lack of transparency at
land titling offices; personnel and resources constraints; lack of capacity of land titling departments
and the high costs to applicants of obtaining title; and
* the liberalization in land laws which has resulted in increased purchase of land by agro-business and
other business groups for production as well as speculative purposes. Although land transfers take
place among local villagers, outside groups are also activelybuying up large tracts of land. According
to the group discussions, at least one fifth of families had sold off land to larger operators. Officials
estimate that in the past five years, about 15 percent of the total land area has changed hands with the
better-off as net buyers and the poor as net sellers.
10.
According to the WFP (1999), eight out of 100 communes surveyed had a rate of landlessness of
20 percent or greater. In the focus group discussions, lack of access to land was reported to be a growing
problem in the post-conflict areas of Battambang and Banteay Meanchey, the plantation areas of
6

The workshops were jointly organized by Slum Dwellers International and the Asian Coalition for Housing Rights with the assistance of the
Urban Resource Center and Squatters and Urban Poor Federation.

- 63 Kampong Speu, Kampong Cham and parts of Kratie and Ratanakiri provinces. Other areas where
landlessness or land poverty have been mentioned as serious problems are: areas where returnees or
internally-displaced people (IDPs) have been resettled; reconciliation areas or former Khmer Rougecontrolled zones; scrub areas between riverine and forest areas (this includes degraded forests where the
communities are cut off from access to minor forests and where family migration for low wage
employment is pervasive); settlements along the highways with communities consisting mainly of
internally-displaced people (IDPs) or returnees; and periphery settlements or areas outside the urban
centers supplying wage labor to the towns.
11.

Other indicators that emerged from the discussions include:

* Inadequate access to land for IDPs. At least one-third of IDPs participating in the discussions
reported that they have no land IDPs. About the same proportion reported that they do not hold any
record of ownership or user rights, although they maintained they had ownership rights nonetheless.
Further, in many IDP resettlement areas, the presence of land mines and unexploded ordnance (UXO)
constrain access to land close to roads. In the northwestern provinces at least one-fifth of the land is
reported to be inaccessible for that reason.
* Reported growing incidence of legal disputes over land. Land disputes constitute the second highest
number of legal cases in Cambodia. Indeed, the Ministry of the Interior has a department exclusively
charged with settling of land disputes. Many officials interviewed agree that land is being arbitrarily
occupied by some influential people and conflicts on land are emerging as a serious problem. Many
land disputes are allegedly settled in favor of the powerful and well-connected. 'As long as the
current procedure that requires 13 different people to sign a land possession certificate is in practice,
intimidation and violence will be there. We are working towards a new land law and hopefully this
will reduce insecurity of tenure and streamlinepossessions,' said Lim Voan, National Director of the
Land Titling Department.
*

Growing difficulty and cost of securing certification of land rights. Participants in the discussions
complained that the level of corruption in land title offices and among commune chiefs has increased.
In many places, at least 20 percent of the value of the land was said to be commonly required as 'tea
money' payment. One participant related an incident regarding a plot of land in Prey Veng province
where the land title officials and commune chief reportedly demanded more money than the plot was
worth. Even in poor rural areas such as Dambe district in Kampong Cham province, unofficial
payments of as much as $500 were reportedly demanded for investigating and issuing 'authorization
letters' to the claimant. Such transaction costs distort the market and also increase the cost of
production for the agriculturalpopulation.

*

Opportunities to develop new agricultural land were diminishing as pressure on land from all quarters
had greatly increased.

*

In addition, a correlation between landless and land-poor participants and a high ratio of dependents
was noticeable. One-third of the landless and those with marginal landholdings reporting having
more than three dependents to one income earner. The dependency ratio was also high among femaleheaded households. 'Women generally support children up to 15 or 16 years of age. Thereafter, they
have to earn for themselves. It is the disabled and demobilized soldier-husbands who place enormous
burdens on their wives as their income earning capacity is very limited,' said Bou Savy in Ek Phnom
district in Battambang. In contrast, families with more economically active members were able to
overcome a bad agricultural year by working in non-farm occupations, while simultaneously
cultivating the available land. This way they were able to overcome financial problems and at the
same time retain the land during bad years. One-fifth of the families reported that they resorted to
this practice. 'We were able to overcome temporary setbacks in our income and did not sell the land
immediately. However, we could not retain it for a long period either. A large family sometimes
delayed our decision,' said Pech Virak, a village leader in Ta Preang district in Kampong Speu
province. According to participants, their dependency ratio often fluctuated as households gravitated
between periods of surplus and deficit food situations and as household members migrated out in

-

64 -

search of work. They also reported land sales as a last resort when households exhaust their food
stocks and have no options left except to sell their landholdings. Once sold, such land was not easily
regained. Accordingly many landless people were compelled to leave agriculture and to migrate to
other areas, especially to the towns, to find work.
12.
At the village level, families that have few possessions, skills, or relatives to help them, are most
vulnerable to becoming landless, particularly if they live in communities that lack leadership orsocial
capital. Children of landless families are often condemned to remain landless, because their parents do
not have land to pass on to them, and because land is too expensive for poor people to buy. Once
landless, families are often trapped in a hand to mouth existence with little chance of escape.
13.
In the communities consulted, it was observed that even among those households that considered
themselves as landowners, at least 10 percent had never received formal recognition of their user rights.
Reasons stated included inaction by village or commune chiefs, unclear demarcation of village
boundaries or conflict with neighboring villages. However, the main reason appears to have been the
change in land laws for the recognition of ownership rights over residential land, and possession rights
over cultivable land. Under the system that prevailed from 1989-1992,people who had occupied property
for at least one year could apply for certificates for the right to occupy and use the land. The applicant
would fill out a form identifying the neighbors on all sides, and this would be signed by the commune or
district chief. Subsequently, a temporary receipt would be issued for possession or ownership. In 1992
Cambodia created the Cadastral Department and passed the Land Law.7 This department was initially
under the Ministry of Agriculture, but is now directly under the Council of Ministers. A new application
process was required for people to apply for new certificates of ownership for residential and agricultural
land. Compliance with the new law has been slow not least because of differences in interpretation of the
law and its requirements and the heavy expenses incurred in land titling.
14.
Easy access to common property resources, for example, grazing land, forests, rivers and lakes,
had traditionally contributed substantially towards the livelihood and food security of rural communities,
especially poor households. According to a recent Mekong River Commission survey, common property
resources account for as much as 20 percent of some rural households' incomes8 . Access to these
resources is rapidly being restricted by a combination of factors. Groups in the consultations reported that
it had been the usual practice for fishing rights, use of common land resources such as forests, and sand,
to be decided at the village level by the households themselves. Now these rights are being determined by
local authorities. More alarming were the unclear procedures for privatization of these commonly-used
resources. Working in collaboration with soldiers and business people, local authorities have allocated
concession rights to outside groups to exploit large areas of forests and wetlands. Many fishing areas are
now leased by influential businessmen who own mechanized boats and nets and have displaced the
traditional fishermen. Around the six provinces of the Tonle Sap Lake, most fishing areas are occupied by
a few dozen businessmen while access of the local people has been reduced. A similar situation was
reported in the case of sand which the poor traditionally had access to engage in for off-season brickmaking. Recently, large building contractors have gained access to these resources through land leases.
15.
Many of the problems with access to traditional common resources are related to the breakdown
of the mechanisms of internal governance, the loss of access controls, and ambiguous legal status.
'Degradation of common property resources in Cambodia is the fault of governance. The resulting
encroachment and illegal use of common property resources is due to muscle power,' said Srey Peou,
community leader in Krang Svay village in Prey Veng province.
16.
Allegations of land grabbing by powerful or influential groups and nepotism in land allocation
were commonly aired by every community consulted. Participants also reported a breakdown of
traditional and new governance systems in land and the use of weapons and violence to settle land
conflicts. Resentment was strong. A human rights worker in Kampong Cham stated: 'along the district
The workshops were jointly organized by Slum Dwellers Intemational and the Asian Coalition for Housing Rights with the assistance of the
Urban Resource Center and Squatters and Urban Poor Federation
8 Ahmed Mahfuzuddin, et.al. (1998) Socio-Economic Assessment of Freshwater Capture Fisheries of Cambodia - Report on a Household
Survey, Mekong River Commission, Phnom Penh.
7

- 65 and provincial roads, land grabbing is regularly reported and ... most disputes are settled by threat and
intimidation'. Besides expropriation of land by officials, and businesses, the participants reported
attempts to expel poorer households through quasi-legal means, including use of fraudulent title
documents and/or bribes to judges and court officials; and fraudulent land sales or illegal mortgages of
land.
17.
The discussions also indicated that uncertainty related to land issues was hampering efforts at
more productive and efficient use of agricultural land in a number of ways. Firstly, it discouraged the
flow of investments into land and agriculture. Secondly, it was paving the way for conversion of
agricultural lands for non-agricultural uses. Finally, it diminished the collateral value of agricultural
lands making it difficult for rural families to obtain credit.
18.
For Thun Saray, a noted human rights activist in Cambodia, and many others consulted, the
problems of equitable land distribution are deeply rooted and would require far-reaching political
solutions. 'Progress in land titling has been slow and has yet to make a dent in rural poverty. Substantial
delays in the implementation of land legislation reflect the shortages of funds for such a program and a
lack of political will.' Saray also believes that without political will and determination at the national
level, the on-going debate on land is likely to be ineffective.'It is now ten years since the privatization of
land ownership and rights. During this period, not even 10 percent of the land has been legally
redistributed, and barely 15 percent of the agricultural land owners have some documentation. This means
that the majority of Cambodians are illegally occupying land. This situation is unhelpful for poor people'.
Urban Poor: Housing and InfrastructureIssues
19.
Most participants in the urban consultations and workshops identified themselves as recent
migrants to Phnom Penh who had moved for the following reasons: previous conflict and insecurity in the
villages; drought and crop failure; and escape from rural indebtedness. While urban poverty is less
extensive and less severe than rural poverty, the consultations indicate a causal link between rural
poverty, landlessness and the rise of urban poor groups clustered in squatter and shanty settlements. As
long as rural livelihoods remain insecure, and economic and job opportunities are centered in Phnom
Penh and other urban areas, rural-urban migration is likely to continue, and the numbers of urban poor
and pressure on land and housing resources will increase.
20.
Most groups consulted complained that the rising demand and costs of land and housing in
Phnom Penh had outstripped their ability to meet their shelter needs through private or state provided
housing. Many participants stated that housing and land costs had risen faster than other household
expenses. One indicator of the scarcity of urban land and housing, according to some, is that the
Municipality of Phnom Penh must now purchase land from private owners for its own use.
21.
The urban poor in Phnom Penh typically squat or rent in the following areas: low-lying floodprone areas; rooftops; old buildings that have not been maintained; unoccupied public or private land;
pavements; or cheap boarding houses. Most of the respondents in the urban consultations reported that
they did not own any land or adequate dwelling unit or have security of tenure. Although one-fifth of
them reported having Occupier-User-Receipts(OURs) which are a form of user rights, these OURs do not
serve as ultimate evidence of ownership.
22.
Participants also pointed to other constraints affecting their access to the land and housing market
in Phnom Penh such as ambiguities in land law; the absence of regular market-based activity; the
increase in speculative activities in the land-related legislationand housing sector; and the inefficient
public allocation of land.
23.
Most communities consulted said that they depend on savings from families or informal loans
from friends or relatives in order to build or obtain access to housing. Even the local money lenders were
reported to be unwilling to provide loans to urban squatters for house building. The people most affected
by the credit shortage are the poorest, particularly women, who lack security against which to borrow.

- 66 24.
Many social problems were reported to arise out of poverty and related urban land and housing
problems. The most visible are conflict over land ownership/user rights; violence within the family and
with neighbors; increase in divorce or abandonmentof wives by husbands; and neglected children who, in
the worst cases, are trafficked for commercial sex.
25.
In the focus group discussions with women, they related that the main determinants of where they
decide to squat or settle were access to job opportunities,basic amenities and health centers. Commenting
on the high cost or non-availability of water and sanitation facilities in urban areas, Prak Sophany, a
community leader in Toul Kork settlement stated that'it is really access to water and sanitation facilities
which determine our choice of housing location.' Sometimes, however, women will choose to move to
less accessible areas to be close to the social support of family members, although this might limit their
opportunities for employment. At least one-third of those interviewed said they live where they doto be
close to some form of family safety net.
26.
During the community discussions, many participants expressed strong concern over water
access issues. Only one-third of the urban communities had access to water from protected sources,
indoor tap, stand pipes, and covered wells with hand pumps. In recent years, even though some
communities have had improved access, others have had to switch to alternatives such as buying from a
local vendor. Most respondents confirmed that more and more people are forced to walk further and
switch to water sources of uncertain quality. A high proportion of household expenditure was for water
and sanitation, and related healthcare arising from contamination of water and food. Some families living
in rooftop settlements reported spending at least 30 percent of their monthly expenditure to buy water. In
the squatter communities, women and children are primarily responsible for collecting water. At focus
group discussions with women, respondents indicated that they spent six times more time than men do
collecting water. 'Every morning I wake up only to worry about where to get water for the day. Women
are most affected because they have to spend rmostof their time searching for water. There are no wells,
no taps, no nearby river,' said Chhoeun Khema, a resident of a roof-top unit on Monivong Boulevard.
Even in areas supposedly 'well-served' with water connections, people spoke of irregularity in supply and
poor quality. In communities with improved sources, people were often forced to switch to expensive
alternatives in the dry season. In some areas where there were piped water systems, water sources often
dried up for as long as six months in a year.
27.
A related issue raised was the cost of health care. Many participants reported spending a sizable
proportion of their wages on health care. Some households estimated spending $250 per annum on health
care, out of total incomes that do not exceed $700 per year. The poor quality of water and unhealthy
sanitary conditions were identified as contributing to increased health expenses for all the communities
consulted. Poor health affected economic production of all age groups, reducing their output and ability
to earn a living. Unsanitary conditions linked to the lack of a clean water supply, particularly after child
birth, were reported to have resulted in major health problems for women in particular. This had increased
the financial strain on families since they have to raise or borrow money to pay for health needs.
28.
At least 75 squatter communities with over 2,000 people live in rooftop tenements in Phnom
Penh. These dwelling units were built with the permission of the existing occupants after payment of a
fee, reportedly ranging from $ 200 to 350. In such dwelling units, access to water and sanitation facilities
are also serious problems. Dwellers have to pay large sumnsfor water and use of toilet facilities. As the
tenements are 'illegal', they are generally not connected to electricity lines. 'There is no land tenure or
security in these dwelling places. We merely pay other occupants living below and ... erect a place to
live. I have even paid tea money to the local police to escape from harassment', said Mak Saroeun, 35, a
tailor. 'My clients are from this area and therefore I cannot afford to move out. I know for sure that the
government is not going to recognize us and provide some support as we are illegally occupying the roof
top. Occasionally we are harassed. But I have no choice except to stay here till I save sufficient resources
to move to a new place'. People such as Saroeun are willing to move, though they might be concemed
about job opportunities. Others have less choice. According to Chrin Ngy who has carried out several
surveys of the urban poor, 'women form the largest group living on the roof tops and they usually have no

- 67 alternative but to stay there. 'This is the easiest place they could find - near to the market areas where
they can pursue some small trade. For them moving out of such shelter areas will be unbearable'.
29.
Not all urban squatters live in constant insecurity. Some of the urban squatter communities
surveyed had obtained Occupier-User-Receipts (OURs) for which they had made average payments of
about $20 to the village (or Sangkat) chief for the right to occupy a housing plot of about 10 square
meters. This payment, and subsequent community acknowledgment of occupation, were considered by
the participants to be more important than possession of any document from the state. OURs are also
often traded or transferred but the exchanges take place in an unregulated market. Although obtaining
access to land parcels is not difficult if one has the means to do so, there are many problems attached to
this customary tenurial practice. Firstly, the pennit to occupy the land is temporary and any adverse
decision of the Sangkat cannot be challenged by the poor. Female-headed households are particularly
vulnerable to intimidation and threat. In the focus group discussions with women, participants often drew
attention to the possible use of force to evict them from their present housing. Further, recent successful
attempts at relocation of squatters have persuaded some village chiefs to take a tougher position against
some residents in order to obtain monetary gains. Even when their occupancy is 'authorised', buyers of
such parcels do not have security of tenure since the transactions are carried out on a personal basis and
are not recognized by the state.
VULNERABLE GROUPS

30.
Vulnerable groups include IDPs and returnees; persons with disabilities; war widows and children
affected by war; and female headed poor households. Although no special consultations were conducted
with these groups they were well represented in the communities and settlements visited, and members of
these groups brought up many concerns pertinent to their special vulnerability and needs. The following
are some of the issues pertaining to these groups gleaned from the consultation process, as well as from
other sources.
Returnees and IDPs
*

Returnees are over-represented among the landless poor in many areas covered by the consultations
and other studies. In particular, many of the 370,000 Cambodians resettled from border camps in the
four northwestern provinces do not have access to land because of lost or disputed property
titles/rights.

*

In the consultations, a sizable proportion of returnees and IDPs reported difficulties in coping with
the pressures of displacement and in finding access to cultivable land. The origin of the difficulties
appears to lie in the failure of agencies and organizations that were involved with the repatriation of
refugees in late 1992 to early 1993 to fully understand the complexity of land issues, and to deal
effectively with land allocation. Moreover, these agencies had only a limited period of time to make
arrangements for new land for returnees. The inability to ensure equity in distribution and legitimize
the status of land provided to returnees has led to problems that persist until today. In some areas, for
example, the agencies had persuaded local authorities and 'old' villages to accept returnees using the
incentive of the new development programs in the area. Due to a lack of communication,however,
'new' families were allowed to occupy land only for a brief period of time after which they were
pressured to move out. Because the new families were outsiders and tended to be more passive, they
typically lost out in the ensuing claims to the land.

*

The consultations also highlighted the variety of circumstances that have led to land disputes among
IDPs and retumees and their subsequent dispossession. Under the 'reintegration' approach, most
returnees and IDPs were persuaded to settle within existing villages rather than assisted in the setting
up of new settlements. Conflicts between the 'old' and 'new' families have been common. In many
instances, 'old' villagers had expected some economic benefits in return for allowing new settlers in
their neighborhood. In addition, many new families had agreed to provide 'free labor' to 'old'

- 68 villagers as compensation for allowing them to occupy part of the village land. Following
disagreements,a number of longer settled families reclaimed land that they had given to the returnees.
*

Other constraints reported by returnees included the lack of community relationships, the lack of
family networks and the lack of employment. In the IDP communities consulted, one third of the
participants reported that they had not worked or obtained employment in the past month, ten percent
reported that they had worked only a few days in the past month, and one quarter reported not
planting rice in 1999. Though one can assume that poor returnees and poor locals face many similar
problems, returnees made up a disproportionately large number of landless poor and vulnerable in
most areas interviewed. As the expulsion of new families increases in frequency in many localities,
feelings of insecurity on the part of those that have been resettled, and doubts about their ability to
stay on the land, have also grown. This has resulted in the further polarization of village community
in resettled areas.

* In every community investigated, at least one-third of the returnees indicated severe poverty,
especially where they do not have access to forest or common land or cultivable land. Where land
was available, IDPs reported having access to much smaller average plots - less than 0.5 hectare than old settled communities. These findings are consistent with the observations of NGOs working
in the villages.
* Among the IDPs and returnees, women are primarily responsible for finding food for their families.
Many have to contend with absent husbands who have migrated out in search of work, leaving the
women with the double burden of family care and having to look for income.
•

Access to land, whether through ownership or occupancy, also appears to make an important
difference in psychological well-being. The most unfortunate groups appear to be those currently
living along the Cambodia-Thai border who lost their land when the area was occupied by hostile
forces, and who now sense that their situation of landlessness is permanent. 'Reclaiming our lost la,id
is near to impossible,' said Uch Kim San, a resident in Poipet. 'Many land parcels are heavily mined
and de-mined land was not returned to most of the previous occupants'. Another respondent had a
more pessimistic view. According to So Phat, a commune leader in Bantaey Ampil district,'Unless
adequate steps are now taken to ensure food security and the livelihood of these families, the outbreak
of violence and strife is imminent.'

Female Headed Households
e

Female-headed families were another sizable group in the discussion reporting difficulties with access
to land. Even when they owned land, they reported the smallest land holdings: nearly 80 percent
owned less than one hectare. Many women also reported that they were marginalized in access to
land operation. In particular, female headed households were most disadvantaged because they
lacked labor (especially male labor) and could only operate land of smaller sizes than male-headed
households. This group is most prone to frequent transfers of land, either by sale or to repay debt an acute problem, especially affecting women - two-thirds of those interviewed reported long term
debts of about $150-$200. As female-headed households hold relatively few assets (land, houses, and
livestock) - they have to engage in a great variety of informal work activities to make ends meet.
This was less frequently the case with male-headed households.

* One of the participants, Houn Sathea, 56, a resident in Sakt village in Kampong Speu province,
widowed in 1978, summarized her present situation as follows: 'In 1979, I was happy to have
survived. It took several years for me to reconstruct my life and gain confidence. I could not think of
buying more land or other assets. By the time my life was more or less back to normal, prices for
agricultural land began to increase. I could not afford to buy more land.As I grew older I was forced
to hire labor. Over time, farming my own land became difficult and unprofitable, and I transferred my

- 69 land to my neighbor. Now I have to work as a landless laborer.' Most of the poor female household
heads in the discussion reported surviving by subsistence farming.
*

Other reasons cited for limited land of female-headed households include gender bias in customary
land practices, the system of land administration and legislation, and in the functioning of the land
market. Under the land liberalization in 1989 and the ensuing confusion due to an unclear legislative
process, the land rights of women, especially female headed households, were adversely impacted.
As land redistribution was carried out on the basis of household composition and size, kinship support
and access to capital or assets, female headed households tended to be given smaller allocations.

*

Ability to farm the land depends on the age and health of the female head, the number of working age
children and access to hired or exchange labor. Land registration is also a key gender issue. Land is
generallyregistered in a husband's name whatever the contribution of the wife. In divorce settlement
cases, wives have often not been able to claim half shares in the land. In theory too, when land is
jointly registered, both parties must sign to transfer the land title. However, in practice, this is not
enforced and since men make the decisions on major land issues, women are beholden to their
husband's decisions.In addition, the low literacy rate of womer? makes it more difficult for them to
be knowledgeable about the land registration process.

* One of most important causes of vulnerability for female-headedhouseholds in accessing land rights
is inadequate education. Low levels of literacy among women increase the difficulties and risks they
face in a document-based titling system. Nhim Phan, 43, lost her piece of land as she could not
understand the document shown to her by the commune chief. She was told that her land would be
'used for some time' and she would get rice in exchange. 'For two years I received three bags of rice
each harvest. One drought and the cultivator forgot about me', she noted.
Elderly Women and War Widows
l

Households headed by elderly women and war widows tend to suffer high rates of poverty and
deprivation, especially those with fewer income earners in the family. A recent estimate has put the
number of war widows at 8,000 with an average of 4-5 children in the family to care for. Relatively
little is known about the profile and specific needs of this group, for example, whether they have
access to land and how they have been able to make up for the income loss of the male head. One
hypothesis is that the safety net for such families is stronger in rural areas where extended households
are more common. In contrast, urban women in these groups do not have access to the same
networks of extended and joint households and are more deprived in terms of their consumption
needs.

*

In Phnom Penh, where political violence has claimed many lives in the last few years, many women
in thleconsultations stated that violence had forced them to change their lifestyles. Half of them said
they knew someone who had been killed, and one-third reported that they knew of a friend or relative
that had been robbed. One of the biggest problems, according to many women, is the absence of a
dependable city government. This vacuum has opened the door for criminal gangs to battle for control
of land and property in the city. Local authorities interviewed conceded that the number of land and
property disputes has increased in recent years and that force is freely used. 'In such power games,
fernale-headed families are easy targets. Cultures of poverty, unemployment, backwardness and
silence are reinforced and explained away as part of the natural order of inherent inequalities and
ability', said a woman Deputy Chief of a district in Phnom Penh. 'In an environment of insecurity,
mere fear of intimidation is sometimes sufficient to make a woman move out of her residence'.

9 The literacy rate of female heads of household (42.7 percent) is well below that of all Cambodian women (58.0 percent) (UNICEF, 1998).

- 70 Demobilized Military Personnel

Demobilized military personnel, particularly the elderly and disabled, are potentially vulnerable
because of inadequate skills and poor education, and also because of uncertainties regarding access to
land. Land scarcity may mean that a combination of land and non-land based economic options will
have to be pursued if reintegration programs for veterans are to be successful in the long term.
Persons with Disabilities

*

Cambodia's violent recent history, the presence of around four to six million land mines, the lack of
basic health care, poor infrastructure, and the poverty of the majority of its citizens have contributed
to a high incidence of disabilities. National statistics are limited, but, according to recent estimates,
there are approximately 30,000-40,000 amputees in Cambodia, most of whom are men between the
ages of 19 and 35. Due to the presence of land mines, the number of amputees is said to be increasing
by about 150-200 each month (Handicap International). There are an estimated 32,000 children with
disabilities under 18 years of age in the country (approximately 21 per cent of the total number of
persons with disabilities).

*

Poverty and disability in Cambodia are directly linked. People with disabilities tend to be socially as
well as economically marginalized. For adults, being able to contribute to the family income by
earning money through labor is an important determinant of status and acceptance in society. In
general, access to education, health and employment opportunities for persons with disabilities is very
limited. In this context, access to land, even if the disabled are not able to farm themselves, is an
important issue for them as it provides them with a tangible asset and a source of livelihood.

Ethnic Minorities

*

It was not possible to include consultations with indigenous ethnic minorities in the present work but
data from a recent study indicates special cause for concern on land issues'°. According to the study,
eight indigenous tribal groups in Ratanakiri province face increasing pressure on their ancestral lands
and traditional livelihoods as a result of encroachments by large-scale industrial plantations and
property speculators. As the province is opened up for potential plantations, hydropower, and logging
concessions, the needs, customs, and traditional livelihoods of the indigenous inhabitantswill need to
be taken into account. With development in the province proceeding rapidly, there is dwindling
access to land and natural resources for indigenous populations. At least four large scale concessions
for palm plantations have been approved since 1995. In addition, several proposed hydropower
projects on the Sesan and Srepok rivers and their tributaries could displace highlanders who have
already been relocated by the government from their ancestral lands to new villages.

COPINGSTRATEGIESOF THERURALANDURBANPOOR

31.
The poor and disadvantaged have always adopted a variety of coping strategies to meet their
needs, including various means to gain access to land. These strategies, some of which are discussed
below, should be taken into account in any concerted move to alleviate poverty and reduce vulnerability.
As land resources are often the main and only assets of the rural poor, any development program or
strategy that involves the allocation and use of land should also factor in the impacts that are likely to
result from the program and the likely implications for land access and security of the poor.

'° Sara Colm 'Options for land security among indigenous communities' (1997)

- 71 -

Sharing of Land Resources
Many participants reported that they share land resources with their children to assist family members
who would otherwise be landless and without the means of food security. While this can be regarded
as a form of informal safety net at the family level, it also results in the drawing down of assets and
capital that can especially affect the elderly. Chhoeun Sophea, 61, related how she eventually became
landless. Late in 1982, she received six hectares of land, for a family of six children and herself, from
the commune chief. Beginning in 1988 her children were married and set up their own houses. 'I
shared land each time with them. By the time my last child, a daughter, was married in 1996, I had
given up all of my share', she said. 'With no addition to our land holding, each of my children depend
on smaller farms to eke out a livelihood which is very difficult for them. Consequently, they are
unable to take care of me and I have become a burden to them'.
Diversification and Migration
*

In areas close to towns, for example in the large-scale resettlement project in Poipet near the ThaiCambodian border, new job opportunities have made up for lack of access to land. In particular,
many returnees are trying to diversify income sources and support themselves through multiple
activities, including fishing, seasonal farm work and day labor. Many people have migrated to border
towns in Thailand for work.

*

In many border villages, it is also quite common to find that young women have moved out to seek
work in Thailand. 'Young women are recruited for heavy work in construction as well as for different
service jobs. Although the demand for male laborers is higher, women as well as men are recruited
for work in Thailand. Many Cambodian women can be found working in construction, garment
factories, the fish-processing industry, domestic service and other kinds of work. Women of all ages
are recruited. Some women follow their husbands who work in Thailand. Others are single women or
widows who hope that the money earned will be enough to support themselves and their families,'
said Meas Malin, community development worker with a local NGO in Battambang.

-

While many women move to Thailand or Phnom Penh to take advantage of economic opportunities
there, and see it as a justifiable way to improve their situation back home, there are families who send
away their young children, especially girls, to work in the sex trade. There are also growing reports
of an increase in the number of women and children who have been trafficked illegally for work in
the entertainment or sex industry, especially in Thailand. For some groups among the rural poor,
attempts to cope with their vulnerability through labor migration has exposed them to new and often
more serious forms of vulnerability.

Transient Landlessness
* Focus group discussions revealed that a number of households gravitate in and out of landlessness as
their economic circumstances dictate. With some impoverished farmers, their small land-holding is
often the only asset they possess, and when emergencies arise, they are forced to sell the land and
move away. However, when their situation improves, they will try to return to farming by purchasing
title or rights of use to another plot of land. This form of 'landlessness' as a coping strategy for
some vulnerable groups should be distinguished from the problems of the hard-core landless who do
not have any access to land. The phenomenon of temporary landlessness as a coping mechanism can
be seen in the case of at least one-third of the rural families participating in the discussions, usually
the younger ones.
*

'Poor households with frequent changes in income tend to buy and sell land frequently. Whenever a
household's income crosses below a threshold limit, that household secures a piece of land. The
household need not cling to the piece land for ever. They dispose of the land when their incomes
decline or they can no longer cultivate it', said Mao Phearun, leader in Kong Kondeaung commune in

- 72 the Kong Meas district of Kampong Cham province. Frequent variations in household income
account for the moves between marginal land holding and landlessness. If a household's income is
close to subsistence level, even small changes in household income could have a significant impact.
To fully understand the dynamics of poverty, life cycle case studies of small farmers could be carried
out to correlate their economic situation against their movements in and out of landlessness over an
extended period of time.
Remittances
* In many communities interviewed, remittances from abroad and domestic private transfers are key
components in the survival of the poor. Domestic transfers tend to take place from those who migrate
to urban areas for employment to their families in poor rural areas. Though reliable data are not
readily available, the group discussions indicated that every village had some members who had
migrated in search of work and, on average, remitted $10 per month. These remittances accrue to the
middle-poor in the villages.
*

Remittances from abroad, by comparison, tend to accrue more to the upper class and more
economically stable families. Average remittances varied with families in the northwestern provinces
reporting an annual receipt of $1,000 per year, while others received less. Besides remittances to
families, migrants also donate funds for the renovation of pagodas in the village. 'Migration has
helped to reduce unemployment by almost 40 percent in this village. Overseas employment,
particularly in Thailand, has also reduced the pressure on the domestic labor market. However,
remittances are not forthcoming consistently and often are spent on luxury items,' said Veng
Sothirak, a community leader in Battambang.

Non-farm Employment
*

Many communities reported a high dependence on non-farm employment. In the recent past, this was
made possible by numerous labor-based public work programs in the country. In the 1980s, a number
of donor-supported NGO programs provided short-term, non-farm employment. In the 1990s, the
construction of new roads and road rehabilitation schemes offered employment and eventual
resettlement opportunities to returnees and IDPs. International agencies and more lately, government
agencies, have also implemented labor-intensive infrastructure upgrading programs, including food
for work. Some estimates indicate that at least 200,000 person-days have been created through such
programs. Large labor-based employment has also been made available through programs such as
IDA's Social Fund I project. Many landless households have been able to make use of this form of
safety net to obtain income to supplementresources that are otherwise based on seasonal production.

Access to Training, Credit and Other Assistance
*

A number of livelihood creation programs designed to provide training and credit to the poor have
been established in Cambodia. Surveys reveal that, despite the proliferation of these programs, lowincome families still lack access to credit. Nearly two-thirds of credit received by the poor came from
private moneylenders, relatives and friends. Communities interviewed informed that credit from
NGOs and other agencies met only a small proportion of their needs. They believed there was much
greater potential for microfinance programs

* A number of NGO initiatives have appeared in recent years to promote community-based
development in the urban areas. Available information indicatesthat at least 85 NGOs are working in
Phnom Penh on various urban and community development issues, but that their coverage is still
limited. Work on urban land and housing issues has recently been undertaken by a regional network,
the Asian Coalition for Housing Rights (ACHR), who work closely with Solidarity for the Urban
Poor Federation (SUPF) the Urban Poor Development Fund (UPDF) and other groups. The savings

- 73 -

and credit scheme developed by ACHR has so far been able to accrue deposits up to $32,000 from
176 squatter communities. This money is used for providing credit to small entrepreneurs. UPDF is
also providing group housing finance, on a credit basis, to urban poor communities.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF GROUPS CONSULTED

32.
More detailed research is needed on issues relating to land access, and poverty and vulnerability,
on the basis of which policy reforms could be formulated. Areas of research could include patterns of
land ownership and land operation, trends in incidence of landlessness or land poverty, workings of the
formal and informal land market, and the land problems and issues that pertain to key vulnerable groups
(female-headedhouseholds, indigenous peoples, the disabled, demobilized troops, and urban squatters).
33.
Work should be initiated to pinpoint landless and land-poor vulnerable groups at the district and
provincial level so that they can be more effectively targeted. At the village level, it is marginalized
families with few possessions, skills, or relatives to help them that are most vulnerable to becoming
landless. Village, commune and provincial chiefs and leaders should be encouraged, with appropriate
incentives and training, to pay special attention to the needs and problems of these groups.
34.
Besides collecting information on poor and vulnerable groups and targeting them in local
development projects, local and provincial authorities should be trained to prepare land resource maps
and other planning documents that can provide baseline data for managing land resources in their locality
more effectively and enable the systematic monitoring of the land situation in their area and the land
status of poor and vulnerable groups.
35.
Effective steps should be taken to ensure that the traditional access of established local
communities to common property resources (land, forests and waterways) is not usurped by new groups.
Such action should include prompt action by the appropriate government departments in cases of conflict,
and systematic monitoring and evaluation of concessions granted for forest and land exploitation to
ensure that the rights of traditional groups are given due recognition. At the same time, there is a need to
ensure the sustainable exploitation of these resources through better management systems involving the
participation of the local communities.
36.
The situation with regard to de-mined land requires urgent review and attention in view of
numerous reports that such land intended for IDPs, ex-soldiers and other needy groups, is being
distributed among military officials and influential people. The review should provide guidance on
measures that the government can implement to ensure that de-mined land is distributed judiciously to
intended beneficiaries. It should also propose various checks and balances to prevent the arbitrary
allocation of such land to unintended individuals and groups, as well as provide recommendations on
ways and means of recovering lands that have been misallocated.
37.
Steps should be taken to ensure security of tenure for the agricultural population through
correction of the weaknesses in the existing land practices and laws. In particular, there is a need for a
transparent and accountable system to allow for the quicker resolution of land conflicts and to ensure that
the rights of the weaker classes are protected. Vulnerable groups facing loss of land through debt should
be assisted with exploring other options, including assistance to credit, to ensure that they have the
opportunity to retain ownership.
38.
The government should be encouragedto begin a program of systematic land titling. As part of
the program, it should conduct an awareness raising campaign on the importance and benefits of land title
registration (security of tenure, certainty of ownership, reduction of land disputes, collateral for credit,
easy transfer of land). government should also ensure that the legitimacy of land titles is not undermined
or eroded by arbitrary practices. Presently, many Cambodians especially those living in the rural areas
are not aware of the benefits of legal title. A comprehensive land titling program could help one million

- 74 rural poor families, including 100,000 returnees and IDPs, benefit from the security of tenure that is
conferred by titles. Nearly 70,000 families living in the upland forest areas could also benefit from the
greater security provided by land titling. The proposed land titling program should especially target small
and marginal land holders.
39.
A comprehensive review of programs of assistance to IDPs and returnees should be carried out to
capture lessons from past experience, especially with regard to the allocation and distribution of land.
Since most future returnees and many demobilized soldiers are likely to return to agriculture-based
livelihoods, more effective agricultural support systems are required in areas of resettlement. A judicious
land distribution system that has legal force and is acceptable to the public is required so as to prevent
land disputes and ensure security of tenure for targeted beneficiaries. In addition, stronger efforts should
be made to increase the stock of available agricultural land through de-mining and the recovery of land
that has been wrongly allocated to, or illegally obtained by, military officials and wealthy interests.
40.
Action should be taken to improve access to housing for urban vulnerable groups in Phnom Penh
and other towns with priority given to deprived and poor squatter areas. Modes of assistance could
include provision of financing for low cost housing, and for improving infrastructure, especially water
supply and sanitation, and increasing security of tenure. Further, in view of the expected rapid increase in
the number of rural migrants into Phnom Penh, the increased pressure on access to land/housing and the
linkages of the lack of access to land/housing to other forms of vulnerability, the authorities are
encouraged to develop and implement a comprehensive urban development plan for providing these
communities with basic minimal services and facilities.
41.
Studies should be conducted to examine how gender bias is manifested in the land policy and
land registration system; inheritance of land; land ownership arising from marriage; and land/property
disposal in divorce/separation cases. Based on the results of the studies, appropriate policy instruments
should be developed. At the same time, poor and vulnerable female-headed households and landless
women should be prioritized in income generating and social development programs and projects to
integrated them more effectively into the economy and society.
42.
A host of governance issues are complicating and constraining progress towards a more efficient,
effective and judicious land system in Cambodia. There is a need for a high level review of these issues
and the development of a clear policy and plan to deal with the most urgent and problematic of them.
Without prompt action, it is likely that large segments of the rural and urban population will become
increasingly disadvantaged in their access to a major resource determining their livelihood prospects.
Institutional Involvement in Land Issues in Cambodia
Institution
Prime Minister

Activities
*

*

Council of Ministers

*

Council of Jurists
Administration
Ministry of Interior

*
*

*
*
Ministry of Defense

*

*
Ministry of Finance
and Economics

*
*

At his inauguration the PM committed the new govemment to revision of the land law
In May 1999 in a televised speech the PM directedincoming Provincial Governors to fix land disputes and stated
that officials abusing their power to grab land were treasonous and risked putting the country back into a state of
civil war
Reviewed Cambodia's land legislation in 1998 and adopted in principle a draft revised Land Law, (not yet enacted
and still under discussion with donors and NGOs
Currently working with the ADB on revision of the land law (1999)
Major land holder
Provides the Secretariat to the National Land Disputes Commission
Has set up Provincial Land Dispute Settlement Commissions in most Provinces chaired by Deputy Govemors to
mediate disputes and prevent people from bring their complaints to Phnom Penh
Major land holder
Has a Land Dispute Unit
Has legislative responsibility for authorisingthe sale of State immovable property and for collecting the proceeds.
Maintains a register of State property, but not effectively updated

- 75 Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry
and Fishery

*
*
*

Ministry of Justice
Ministry of Land
Management,
Urbanisation and
Construction

*

Ministry of Land
Management,
Urbanisation and
Construction
Ministry of
Environment
Ministry of Rural
Development

*

*
*

*

*
*
*

*
*
Ministry of National
Assembly Relation and
Inspection and Senate
National Assembly
Commission on
Human Rights and
Reception of
Complaints
Judiciary
ProvincialCourts
Appeals Court
Multilateral/UN
United Nations
Development
Programrne

*

*

Receives land dispute complaints, tabulates them and may refer them to the National Land Dispute Commission

*
*

Provincial Courts handle more land cases than any other civil matters except family matters
As a result of low capacity at provincial level and confusing legislation, many land dispute cases go to appeal

*

UNDP has been involved in mobilizing donor support for revision of the land law, and through CARERE Phase 2
SEILA
CARERE has been funding an advocacy campaign aimed at achieving de jure indigenous community land rights
Co-sponsors of proposed municipality of Phnom Penh, identification of priority needs for urban management and
poverty program
Member NGO/IO Land Law Working Group
Keepers of most comprehensive data sets on land issues and food security

*

*
*
UN World Food
Programme
UN High Commission
for Refugees

*
*
*

*
*
UN Children's Fund
UN Center for Human
Settlement

*
*

Food and Agricultural
Organization
Mekong River
Commission
World Bank

*

ADB

*
*
*

*
*
European Commission
Bilaterals
Japan

*
*

*
*
Germany (GTZ)

*

*
*
Australia (Ausaid)
US (USAID)
Finland (FINNMAP)

Major land holder
Seeking technical assistance from the ADB to develop a land use policy
Currently revising forestry law with donor assistance. This reform and new concession provisions in the revised
land law have the potential to release large areas of land for other uses
Working with Japanese experts to revise the civil code
New Ministry established after last budget framed.
Headed by an ex Minister of Interior who also chairs the National Land Dispute Settlement Commission.
Ministry' officials commenced redrafting land law with assistance from Non-govemmental/intemational
organization (NGO/IO) Land Law Working Group (NGO/IO LLWG) but stopped whenthe Ministry of Justicesaid
it would do most of the work do as part the civil code rewrite
Took over Land Title Department (LTD) from Council of Ministers. LTD has legislative responsibility for
registration and administration of land ttling but with few resources and very low capacity.
Ministry is currently getting technical assistance from FINMAP and GTZ and negotiating with JICA for soft loans
or grant to set up a national cadastre
Has responsibilities to assess environmental impact assessments (including existing subsistence usage and
resettlement implications) reports for hydro/irigation schemes, forestry and agricultural concessions
SEILA Programme has built up planning capacity at Provincial and sub-provincial levels that could be tasked with
supplying land for the poor
Providing the Secretariat for the Inter ministerial Council on Highland
Peoples
Collects reports of land disputes from Deputies and forwards them to the National Land Dispute Settlement
Commission

*
*
*

Provides technical support to NGO/IO Land Law Working Group
Provides financial and technical support to human rights NGOs working with victims of land rights abuses
Providesjudicial mentoring for ProvincialCourt Judges
Member NGO/IO Land Law Working Group
Collects data on land issues
Project Title: Municipality of Phnom Penh: Identification of priority needs for urban management and poverty
reduction. Project Objective: Building sustainable municipal capacity for reducing urban poverty and development
of land policy for urban poor that reduces poverty by ensuring adequate provision of land and services
Has data on land issues
Has data on land and wetlands access and contribution to household
incomes of common property resource
Planned Land Issues and Policy Note and a Land Management Operation
Funds several large scale infrastructure projects with unknown but significant impacts on land market
Loan and Technical Assistance Grant to the govemment for its Agriculture Sector Reform Support Project that,
inter alia, is to be used to revised Cambodia's land legislation (T.A. No. 2591-CAM).
Sustainable Forestry ManagementProject (TA 3152-CAM) is currently working on forestry policy at the request of
the Ministry of Agriculture
Capacity building for land management.
Funds several large scale infrastructureprojects with unknown but significant impacts on land market
Provides technical assistance to the Ministry of Justice to draft the civil code due for completion in 2001
Land use mapping
Provides technical assistance to the Land Titling Department
Has run land registration pilots in two Provinces
Working on integrated food security project in Kampot involving titling
Reviewing its agricultural extension program with a view to incorporating land titling into its approach
Fund, NGOs involved in land law working group
Cambodian Cadastral Project provides survey and registration technical assistance to the Land Titling Department

- 76 InternationalNGOs
Community Legal
Education Centre

*
*

*
*
The Asia Foundation

*

*
IRRI
Japanese Intemational
Volunteer Group
LutheranWorld
Federation
MEDICAM
(Membership org.
gathering some 100
NGOs active in the
health sector in
Cambodia)
Human Rights
Watch/Asia
Handicap Intemafional
Concem

*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*

*
Norwegian Peoples
Aid
Oxfam GB

*
*

Oxfam America
Oxfam Quebec
Asian NGO Coalition
for Agranan Reform
and Rural
Development
CambodianNGOs
Legal Aid of
Cambodia

*
*
*
*

*

Lobbies for improved land rights for indigenous people and monitoring human rights abuses associated with land
rights cases
NGO co-delegate to the donor working group on demobilization
Engaged in land titling work in Kompong Speu
Lead NGO on community forestry campaign to ensure access to forestry products and secure tenure for community
plantations and woodlots
Supporting IDP to resettle in Battambang and Banteay Meanchey on demined land with secure title
Funds the Cambodia Land Study Project
Project manager for Cambodian Land Study Project investigating ways to secure land access for the poor for
sustainable livelihoods
Funds Legal Aid of Cambodia to provide land dispute legal aid. Funds Cambodia Land Study Project
Maps natural resources in Tonle Sap region
Facilitates regional information sharing on land issues
About to undertake regional 100 village PRA survey on land tenure and access

*
*

Researches land issues and related topics

*

Assisting other NGOs with capacity building of National and Provincial Land Dispute Settlement Commissions

*

Lobbies for improved land rights for indigenous people

*

NGO Coordinating body

*
*
*

*

NGO Coordinating body
FacilitatesNGO DemobilizationWorking Group
Stores land issues information
Funded by Asia Foundation to union for Cambodian lawyers.
Provides legal aid for land rights abuse victims.
Trains lawyers in land law
Chairs the NGO/IO Land Law Working Group
Uses its provincial network to provide assistance and referral to land nghts abuse victims
Planning to build land dispute resolution capacity at provincial level
Member of the lO/NGO Land Law Working Group

*
*
*
*
*

Uses its provincial Network to provide assistance and referral to land rights abuse victims
Uses its provincial Network to provide assistance and referral to land rights abuse victims
Funded by USAID to provide regional forums to discuss national issues including land tights abuses
Member of the NGO/IO Land Law Working Group
Measures rate of increase in landlessness in Kompong Speu and other provinces and tailors program for mitigation

*
*

*
*
Cambodian Human
Rights and
Development
Association ADHOC
LICADHO
VIGILANCE
Centre for Social
Development
Partner fotr
Development In
Kampuchea

Runs land titling projects in Battambang for IDP and in Kompong Speu in preparation for mass resettlement
associated with Prek Thnot hydro/iirigation scheme
Promotes public, donors and NGOs' awarenesson the link between landlessness and health care services.
Advocates for user fee exemptons in public health services for those who cannot afford to pay, to prevent
irreversible indebtedness and loss of land.

Provides legal aid for the poor involved in land disputes.
Has 17,000clients involved in 20 major cases
Funded by Oxfam GB and Oxfam America
Provides legal aid for the poor involved in land disputes. Funded by USAID

*
*

*
Cambodia Defender
Project
Cambodia
Development
Resource Institute
Cambodian Centre for
Conflict Resolution
Non Timber Forest
Products
NGO Forum on
Cambodia
Cooperation
Committee for
Cambodia
Kingdom of Cambodia
Bar Association

Provides legal training for business, management and law students
Produces text books on Cambodian property law
Provides advice to community groups such as indigenous communities on land law
Member NGO/IO Land Law Working Group
Funds CDP, CSD, KCBA and other NGOs to provide legal aid for land rights abuse victims and to lobby on
revision of land law
Member NGO/IO Land Law Working Group
Holders of significant socio economic data relating to land issues
Provides lobby services in Japan for Cambodian NGOs working on land reform

*

*

- 77 Urban Sector Group

*
*

Aphivat Strey
Sante Sena
Chivat Thmay
Cambodian Family
Services

*

Private

*
*
*

Negotiates with govemment on behalf of self defining communities land swaps and other resettlement deals
Involved in lobbying donors to get land law revised to get legal recognition of the acquisitive possession rights of
long term, peaceful occupants of State property in the pnivate domain
Lends money for people to buy land and refinancing debts to moneylenders to prevent landlessness in Battambang
Discussing,introducing credit for the purchase of land for the landless in Svay Rieng
Works with Banteay Meanchey authorities to identify new lands for resettlement of IDPs
Works with Banteay Meanchey authorities to identify new lands for resettlement of IDPs

Companies

Sarin Denora and
*
Working on draft of forestry law
Associates
*
Provides legal advice and lobby services to UNDP on indigenous community land rights
Dirksen Flipse Doran
*
Represents major foreign investors and trying to get secure transaction and tenure in immovable property built into
& Le
revised land law
Source: Shaun Williams, 'Land Policy and Institutional Involvement in Land Issues in Cambodia', August 1999.
Note: this table has been compiled from donor strategy papers, and information made available by NGOs. The information is presented for
illustrative purposes only and should not be viewed as any commnitmenton the part of donors or NGOsProjects and programs may be indicative
and subject to the final approval of the appropriate authorities.

- 78 References
Australian Agency for Intemational Development, 'Cambodia Agriculture Sector Study and Project
Identification Mission'. April 1998.
CARE International; Cambodia Mines Action Center; World Food Program, 'Integrated Development
and Demining Pilot Project'. February 1999.
CambodianMine Action Centre, 'Assistance to Mine and UXO Clearance Programmes in Cambodia,
1999to 2001'. 1998.
CambodianRed Cross; Handicap International; United Nations Children's Fund, 'Cambodia Mine
Incident Report'. October 1998.
Colm, Sarah, 'Options for land security among indigenous communities'. 1997
Davenport, Paul; Healy, Joan; Malone, Kevin, 'Vulnerable in the Village'. 1995.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 'Cambodia Repatriation'. Situation
Report: no. 2. March 15, 1999.
Johnson, Kay; Chandara, Lor, 'Governors Told to End Land Grabs'. The CambodianDaily. April 21,
1999.

Kato, Elizabeth; Williams, Shaun Where Has All The Land Gone? Oxfam GB Cambodia Land Study
Project, Reports Vol. l-111, Phnom Penh, 1999
Mahfuzuddin, Ahmad, et.al., 'Socio-Economic Assessment of FreshwateTCapture Fisheries of Cambodia
- Report on a Household Survey,' Mekong River Commission,. 1998
Murshid, K.A.S, 'Food Security in an Asian Transitional Economy: The Cambodian Experience'.
Cambodian Development Resource Institute and United Nations Research Institute for Social
Development: Working Paper 6. December 1998.
PET Survey Report, 'Results of the November-December 1998 Survey of the UN World Food
Programme's Protracted Emergency Target (PET) Zones in Cambodia'. April 1998.
Robb, Caroline; Shivakuma, M.; Vanna, Nil, 'The Social Impacts of the Creeping Crisis in Cambodia:
Perceptions of Poor Communities'. May 1998.
Williams, Shaun, 'Land Policy and Institutional Involvement in Land Issues in Cambodia', study on
poverty, vulnerable groups and land issues, August 1999.
Watershed, 'Cycles of return: Displaced persons, returnees and northwest Cambodia'. Vol.4, No. 1:
July-October 1998.

- 79 ANNEX D. DEBT SUSTAINABILITYANALYSIS

Introduction
1.
This note presents an analysis of Cambodia's debt sustainability over the long term. The analysis
is based on borrowing assumptions and macro-economic projections used in the Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS), and on external debt data available in the World Bank's Debtor Reporting System
(DRS)". The analysis hinges on the treatment of a large portion of Cambodia's external debt to Russia.
The main finding is that, given appropriate macro-economic and financial policies, and assuming the
country can further benefit from debt relieffrom bilateral creditors during 2000, and also assuming
continued availability of official grants and concessional loans, Cambodia's external debt servicing
capacity will improve during the CAS period and will stay within the sustainable threshold levels
throughout the projection periot2 . However, Cambodia's fiscal sustainability on account of servicing
total public debt (external and domestic) is less clear as information on domestic debt is sketchy and not
readily available'3 . Staff estimates of debt service requirements on extemal and domestic debt point to the
conclusion that the high level of government revenue devoted to servicing total debt represents arisk to
the achievement of debt sustainability. Furthermore, attainment of debt sustainability for Cambodia
suffers from the downside risks of other factors such as the country's high level of dependence on official
grants and concessional loans, the country's high dependence on exports of garment and wood products'4 ,
high vulnerability to extemal shocks and the possibility of sluggish response to policy changes by foreign
investors.1

5

Figure 1
aiboda: Exdem Debt 1998
(U limlms)

suesICA
2%o

DCA

CO-rM
al1e

Rve
JNterm*

Tdal

*W
sttemndt

IW

cu-

70/o3%

156.00

ctrldls

12QO0--00...
1,8

O -..

-

4.00
42-00

83%

Z2aQO

irulu1s itrest arms cnlrg-temndeb

Debt Profile
2.

At the end of 1998, Cambodia's external public debt stood at $2,210 million (including short-

term debt and IMF credits) which was equivalent to 77 percent of GDP and 207 percent of exports'6.Of
the total debt outstanding and disbursed, about 15.5 percent was owed to multilateral creditors (including

"l Data on debt to Russia and the United States is being reconciled; projections in this analysis are based on preliminary data provided by the
authorities to the World Bank's Debtor Reporting System (DRS).
12 A sustainable threshold level is defined here as acombination of net present value (NPV) of extemal debt to three-year-average exports being
less than 200 percent and the ratio of debt service to three-year-average exports being less than 20 percent. These criteria differ from those under
the Heavily-lndebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative.
3Staff estimates of domestic debt at the end of 1998 stood at about I11percent of GDP.
14Cambodia's
majoT exports, gannents and log and sawn timber, account for over 69 peTcent of total exports. Export amounts include tentative
estimates of illegal exports of log and sawrt timber.
15The analysis of Cambodia's debt sustainability does not represent a judgment of the eligibility of Cambodia for the HIPC.
16Ratios of nominal total extemal debt to GDP and exports of goods and services.

- 80 -

$156 million to IDA and $66 million to the IMF). Debt to official bilateral creditors accounted for 82
percent of Cambodia's total extemal debt (including 18 percent to the creditors of the Paris Club, not
counting debt to Russia). About 45 percent of Cambodia's bilateral external debt remains in arrears
($990.4 million principal and $10.6 interest, mainly to Russia and the US) 17 Over 93 percent of
Cambodia's external indebtedness is on concessional terms. The terms of new commitments are highly
concessional with an average interest rate of less than 1 percent and average maturity of about 39 years
(including 10 years of grace) providing a grant element of over 82 percent.
Debt Management
3.
The government of Cambodia has adopted a debt management strategy that aims to reduce the
debt burden in the medium term. In 1991, Cambodia signed a bilateral agreement with Russia
consolidating all previous commodity credits of 797 million rubles into a single credit to be repaid in 20
years at zero rate of interest. This agreement was not fully implemented as all maturities since 1991are in
arrears
Table 1. Summary of Cambodia Debt Relief Agreements with Official Creditors
Consolidation
period Consolidation
includes
for currentmaturities
Share
Contract
date of
cutoff
agreement
date
26-Jan. 95 31-Dec-85

Start
date
1-Jan-95

Length
(months)
30

Previously of debt
Amount
rescheduled consolidated consolidated
Arrears
debt
(percent) (S millions)
258
yes
yes
100

4.
In 1995, the creditors of the Paris Club agreed to reschedule Cambodia's external debt in
accordance with the highly concessional Naples terms (see Table 1). Since then Cambodia has signed
bilateral agreements with all its creditors named in the Paris Club terms of reference except the US. The
1995Paris Club terms of reference provided for consolidation and rescheduling of about $258 million of
debt (including $110 interest arrears). Following the implementation ofthe 1995 Paris Club agreement
Cambodia sought and received comparable rescheduling treatment from its creditors outside of the Paris
Club (Poland, Czech and Slovak Republics). While the amount of debt consolidated and rescheduled
under 1995 debt relief appears small compared to Cambodia's debt stock, Russia's joining to Paris Club
of creditors could make Cambodia eligible for further concessional treatment. Dialogue between
Cambodia and Russia has been initiated.
Debt Sustainability
5.
To examine the sustainability of Cambodia's external debt, this analysis uses a long-term macroeconomic scenario, developed jointly by the staff of IDA and the IMF. In addition, some illustrative
rescheduling assumptions regarding removal of current arrears and creditors options for relief on
untreated debt are used. To examine the sensitivity of results to assumption on exogenous values, in
addition to the baseline scenario, three alternative scenarios of (i) lower growth of exports, (ii) lower
availability of grants and (iii) lower availability of concessional funding of financing needs are also used.
Macroeconomicscenario and borrowing assumptions
6.
It is assumed that Cambodia will implement a new three-year adjustment program supported by
an IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, approved October 1999. This program which aims at
accelerating economic reconstruction and reducing poverty will focus on fundamental reforms in public
'1 Debt to Russia has remained unserviced since its last negotiated settlement of 1991.
IS Ruble debts were valued at the historical rate used by the Russian Federation.Based on this valuation, at the end of 1999 Cambodia's stock of
principal arrears to Russia stood at US$ 933.2 million.

- 81 finance, public administration and public resource management. Continuous fiscal adjustment and
improving public and private savings and investment assumes that (i) GDP will grow by an average 5.5
percent in year 2000 and 6 percent over the medium reaching 7 percent growth over the longer term; (ii)
the current account deficit, excluding official transfers will decline from about 13 percent of GDP in the
medium term to 12 percent in 2005 and will decline further to 10 percent by the end of projection period;
(iii) gross official reserves will increase to cover 3.7 months of imports by the year 2002 and gradually
rising to about 4 months by the end of projection period; (iv) consolidation of the fiscal position will
allow the overall deficit of to reach 7 percent of GDP; and (v) export volume will grow by about 9
percent, slightly faster than growth of (retained)imports which is projected to be 8 percent.
Figure2: MajorSourcesof Finance
Official Grants
Multilateral Incl. IMF
Bilateral
FDI

Total

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

191
147
2
120

201
194
9
130

209
176
21
140

216
194
34
150

244
163
41
175

251
148
52
193

324
107
52
201

335
119
54
209

341
132
60
217

368
120
60
226

373
116
61
235

460

534

546

594

623

644

684

717

750

774

785

Cambodia: Major Sources of Finance,
1999-2009

400
U 350

$ 300

_c-r_

m 250

*
Official Grants
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~nMuJtiateral
mnci.IMF~

_
____

io i

Ei~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~uBilateral

ELl~~~~~~~~~~~~FDI

n 150
50
1999 2000

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

2006 2007 2008 2009

7.
Under the above macroeconomic scenario, it is assumed that Cambodia's financing needswill be
covered by official grants, long-term disbursement from bilateral and multilateral creditors and a modest
amount of foreign direct investment (FDI) flows (see Figure 2). It is assumed that Cambodia will
continue to depend on official grants at or above current levels of $200 million per years and these grants
will gradually rise to $373 million by 2009. Long-term net external borrowing disbursement from
multilateral creditors, including IDA, is expected to average $100. Bilateral creditors would disburse an
average of $40 million per year through 2005 and $61 million per year thereafter through 2 0 099. The
ratio of investment/GDP is projected to steadily increase from 15 percent of GDP in 1998 to 24 percent in
2015. Net FDI to the country is expected to rise above its current levels $120 million reaching $235 by
the end of the projection period.
8.
Simulations were run to analyze the sustainability of Cambodia's external indebtedness to
variations in economic performance and debt relief package. Results are summarized in the attached
Tables 2 and 3. Under the baseline scenario, and assuming that Russia would provide an up-front 70
percent discount on the stock of arrears and future maturities to take account Russia's commitment for
such action upon joining the Paris Club in 1997, and also assuming that following the debt discount
Russia would provide debt relief comparable to those provided under 1995 Paris Club terms of reference
19 The availability of these levels of

concessional support is a critical assumption for the viability of the macroeconomic scenaTioand
consequently for any judgment on sustainability.

- 82 Table 2: Sensitivity Analysis of Debt Sustainability
CAMBODIA
PV / XGS
Baseline 1/
Lower Exports 2/
Lower Grants 3/
Less Conc. Gap Loans 4/

2000
83.2
96.5
84.4
86.9

2001
81.4
102.0
83.3
86.8

2002
78.9
103.6
81.5
86.3

2003
75.5
104.2
78.6
84.5

2004
72.4
105.6
76.2
83.0

2005
68.4
105.9
72.8
79.9

2006
65.0
106.8
70.1
77.6

2007
62.0
108.4
67.6
76.0

2008
58.8
109.3
65.0
74.2

2009
56.0
110.3
62.5
72.7

TDS/XGS
Baseline 1/
Lower Exports 2/
Lower Grants 3/
Less Conc. Gap Loans 4/

2000
4.4
5.1
4.4
5.0

2001
4.0
5.0
4.1
4.9

2002
4.3
5.7
4.4
5.3

2003
4.7
6.7
4.9
5.7

2004
5.2
8.1
5.6
6.5

2005
5.8
9.9
6.4
7.5

2006
6.0
11.1
6.7
7.9

2007
6.2
12.1
7.0
8.5

2008
5.9
12.5
6.8
8.7

2009
5.3
12.3
6.3
8.2

Present Value of External Debt as Percent of XGS
180.0

120.0

:DLess

Per

nt

Conc. Gap Loans 41

ce[]000

0

l lllllllll1/
, E lnsBaseline

ELower Grants 3!

6

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

XLower Exports

2V

2009

Years

Total Debt Service as Percent of XGS

16.0
14.0
12.0
Per 1 0 0
ce
nt 8.0

Less Cn_. Gap Loans 4/
[]Baseline 11
MLower Grants 3/

6.0

i*Lower Exports 2

i

4.0
2.0
0.0
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Years

1/ Baseline macro-economic scenario; Debt to Russia reschedualed at concessional rate (2 percent) and 23 years of maturity, 7 years of grace..
2/ Exports are assumed 10%below baseline macro scenario; debt to Russia assumed to be rescheculed at similar to Baseline scenario.
2/ Grants are assumed 10%below baseline macro scenario; debt to Russia assumed to be rescheculed at similar to Baseline scenarto.
4/ Baseline macro-economic scenario; debt to Russia assumed to be rescheduled on concessional terms; Gap loans available at non-concessional rates (7°

- 83 agreement, the ratio of present value of debt to exports2 0 and the ratio of total debt services to exports,
move from the current levels towards the historically manageable threshold levels. Based on these
indicators Cambodia's external debt is projected to be sustainable assuming comparable concessional
treatment of external liabilities to Russia and assuming adequate policy performance following the
implementationof the illustrative debt relief scenario used in this analysis.
9.
Cambodia's extemal debt sustainability was also examined using three alternative scenarios of
(i) lower export growth and (ii) lower level of grants (i) lower availability of concessional funding of
financing needs. Results are summarized in Table 3. As shown in Table 3, sensitivity of critical ratios is
more pronounced in the case of lower growth of exports than in other cases. While in all scenarios
examined here, Cambodia's external debt is projected to be sustainable (provided that concessional
treatment of the stock of arrears is achieved), there are significant downside risks associated with the
borrowing scenario, the level of dependence on official grants and concessional loans (which may or may
not materialize), and the possibility of sluggish response to policy changes by foreign investors. On the
exports side, as the country's open economy (with exports contributing over 30 percent of GDP) is
heavily dependent on exports of garments and logging, external shocks such as adverse price fluctuations
would lead to less than projected growth of exports and would risk maintenance of debt sustainability.
Table3: Cantodia: SensiftfitvAnalbsisof DebtSusta

inty

RatiosofPrmentValue(PV)ofExtenialDebtandTotalDebtSemice(MS) toTihree-year-average
of ExportsofGoodsandServices(XGS)
199>

200

200/

2002

2003

2004

2003

2006

[percen-)

2007

200

2009

Baseline1/
PV/3-yr.avg.XGS

(beforereliel)

171.1

155.8

149.5

138.7

128.1

118.7

109.1

100.8

93.4

86.4

80.2

PV/3-yr avg. XGS

(4fei'relzej'

171.1

83.2

81.4

78.9

75.5

72.4

68.4

65.0

62.0

58.8

56.0

TMS/3-yravgXGS

(befoe reli)

14.7

13.4

5.6

5.6

6.0

6.3

6.8

6.8

6.8

6.4

5.6

TDS/3-yravgXGS

fierrehief

147

4.4

4.0

43

4.7

52

5.8

6.0

6.2

5.9

5.3

177.4
102.0

169.9
103.6

162.5
104.2

156.9
105.6

150.9
105.9

146.6
106.8

143.2
108.4

139.8
109.3

137.1
110.3

LevserExportGrowth 21
PVI3-yr.avg. XGS
PV/3-yr.avg. XGS

(beforeretliefi
(ater

171.1
1711

177.7
96.5

TS1/3-yravgXGS

(before relief)

14.7

15.1

6.7

7.2

8.1

9.3

11.0

11.9

12.8

13.0

12.7

TDS13-yravgXGS

(l-erreliel)

14.7

5.1

5.0

5.7

6.7

8.1

9.9

11.1

12.1

12.5

12.3

(beforerelie)

171.1
171.1

160.2

151.4

141.3

70.1

92.5
65.0

14.7

13.5

5.7

6.2

6.7

72.8
7.4

99.0
67.6

86.7

81.5

122.5
76.2

105.8

83.3
5.7

131.2
78.6

113.5

84.4

7.5

7.6

7.3

62.5
6.6

14.7

4.4

4.1

4.4

4.9

5.6

6.4

6.7

7.0

6.8

6.3

reliq)

LoyerGrants3/
PV/3-yr.avg. XGS
PV/3-yr.avg. XGS
TDS/3-yravgXGS

(afier reliel)
(before relief)

'ITD93-yravg
XGS

(after relie])

LessConcessional
Gap Loans 4/
PV13-yr.avg. XGS

(before reliejg

171,1

162.5

154.9

146.0

137.1

129.3

120.5

113.3

107.4

101.8

96.9

PV/3-yr.avg. XGS

(afterreliej)

171.1

86.9

86.8

86.3

84.5

83.0

79.9

77.6

76.0

742

72.7

TDS/3-yr avg XGS

(before relti

14.7

6.9

14.7

5.3

5.7

7.6
6.5

8.5
7.5

8.8
7.9

9.1
8.5

9.2

(afer reliefi

6.5
4.9

6.7

TDS'3-yravgXGS

14.0
5.0

8.7

8.6
8.2

PresecntValueofDebt(US$ nllion)
GovernmentRevenue(US$million)

1716
477

1671
562

1712
661

1769
789

1811
859

1855
918

1883
1076

1922
1185

1970
1303

2018
1453

2076
1598

360

297

259

224

211

202

175

162

151

139

130

PresentVahueofDebt/Gov. Revenue%

/fBaselmne
macnor-econosic
scario; debtto Russiaassumedtobe rescheduled
on conrcessional
tlems(2% interest ate,23yearsofnatnity and7 yearsof grace).
I Exportsvolurresassnimd10'/obelow
baselinemacroscenano;debtto Russiaaamaedto berescbeduledre concessional
tenns.
I Grants are assumtxdto be 10%/below levels asunmed in baseine macro sceazio; debt to Russiaassurred rescheduled on coneessional temn.

/ Baselinenuto-econoruc scenano;debtto Russiaassnied to berescheduledonconcessonalterns; Gaploansavaiableat non-comcessional
rates(70/o)

ratio used in this analysis, also called solvency indicator, is the ratio of present value of dept (discounted stream of debt
services over the life of loans, using the weighted average currency-specific discounted rate of 7 percent) to three-year average exports.

20 The debt-to-exports

- 84 10.
Furthermore, Cambodia's fiscal sustainability on account of servicing total public debt (external
and domestic) is less clear. The fiscal burden of debt will remain extremely high as the present value of
debt to total government revenue remains high above 200 percent until 2004 under the baseline scenario.
This high level of government revenue devoted to debt service represents a serious risk to the achievement
of debt sustainability.

- 85 ANNEXE. PRIVATESECTORASSESSMENT:BROADOVERVIEW

Introduction
1.
Cambodia is at the crossroads of a new era. Nine years after the signing of the Paris Peace
Accords in 1991, it has not only succeeded in achieving relative economic stability, but has recently
become a full fledged member of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and is
requesting membership to the World Trade Organization (WTO). These developments present a
considerable challenge. The speed at which the economy adjusts and grows as it exploits the benefits
from these new agreements and alliances will depend, on the country's overall policy reforms and the
speed of institutional reform and also on the pace of private sector development.
2.
As a small open economy, membership of ASEAN will facilitate Cambodia's access to key
markets for its products. Recent projections on the growth prospects of the East Asia and Pacific region
forecast an overall economic recovery with GDP projected to rise from 5.5 percent in 1998 to an average
of 6.2 percent in coming years2 1. Increasing inflationary pressures in neighboring countries combined
with the low cost of labor will likely ease the competitive pressures on the Cambodian economy and
provide opportunities to stimulate investment and increase productivity levels. Cambodia's challenge is to
sustain and accelerate growth in order to overcome increasing unemployment and pursue its integration
into the global economy.
3.
This report attempts to evaluate private sector development in Cambodia and the current business
climate, and to identify measures that could further support the private sector as a principal partner in
Cambodia's effort towards achieving sustainable economic development. The report draws from
consultations with the government and private sector during a recent CAS consultation mission in
Cambodia, as well as on existing reports.
4.
Building and promoting private sector development in Cambodia is important for the following
reasons. The first is to complementpublic investment in the social sectors. Government revenue accounts
for only 9 percent of GDP making allocation to some key social public investment categories very
difficult. Private participation and provision would ease tensions on the government budget while
providing basic social services to the population. Second, government expenditure on the wage bill is 48
percent of total revenue. Civil service reform is likely to result in the downsizing of the public
administration.A growingprivate sector is necessary to absorb the redundant public sector workforce;if
not, there could be increased social pressures and instability endangering recent growth achievements.
Third, the pressure on government expenditure exerted by large allocations to defense and security (4.2
percent of GDP in 1998) is expected to reduce with the demobilization efforts. However, after
demobilization the newly-civilian soldiers would need to be absorbed into the productive system of
Cambodia so that they do not resort to illegal and unlawful practices. Fourth, sixty percent of the
Cambodian population is currently below the age of 20, this implies thatpressures on the labor market
will continue to increase in the coming years. Only a growing and sustainable private sector can feasibly
provide the resources needed to absorb the rising employment demands. Fifth, in Cambodia's small open
economy,private sector developmentwill promote integration into the global economythereby providing
access to larger markets. Sixth, government dependence on external financing is acute, and increased
private sector development is needed to reduce this aid dependency. Lastly, to achieve the desired 6
percent medium-term growth target, private sector (foreign and domestic) investment is required;
government investment levels, at 5.7 percent of GDP in 1998 are insufficient. Under these conditions
building an enabling environment for private sector development emerges as a key prerequisite for
fostering growth-reducing poverty and achieving sustainable development
Recent Economic History
5.
The 1990s have been a period of macroeconomic adjustment for Cambodia. A long and sustained
period of economic uncertainty resulting from nearly thirty years of conflict left Cambodia in an
unsustainable macroeconomic situation at the beginning of the decade. However significantprogress has
21

World Bank estimates,November 1999 (Preliminary)

- 86 been made and GDP growth went from 1.2 percent in 1990 to 7.0 percent in 1997, but dropped to 1
percent in 1998 principally due to renewed domestic political instability and the regional financial crisis
in 1997. Annual inflation fell from 141 percent in 1990 to 14.8 percent in 1998. Domestic exports
increased from 2.9 percent of GDP in 1990to 21.8 percent in 1998.Gross foreign reserves increased from
0.9 months of imports to 3.9 months in 1998.
Table 1: Growth rates of GDP by Industrial Origin at 1989 Constant Prices
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
Gross Domestic
7.6
7.1
4.1
4.0
7.6
7.0
1.0
Product
Agriculture
6.7
1.9
-1.0
0.0
6.4
2.4
1.2
Industry
8.8
15.7
13.1
7.5
9.9
18.2
-2.9
Services
8.5
11:2
7.0
7.5
7.8
7.0
2.6
Source: World Bank Estimates

Institutional and Trade Reforms Undertaken By the Government
6.
Beyond broad macroeconomic reforms important steps were taken toward liberalizing and
regulating the economy. Between 1991 and 1997, trade restrictions were reduced, quota coverage on
imports has fallen and the range of import levies has decreased. In the financial sector, the law on state
owned enterprises (SOE) and a sub-decree on privatization procedures for privatizing SOEs was adopted
(1995), laws on the Organization and Conduct of the National Bank, a Sub-decree implementing the
Supervision of Commercial Banks and a new Banking Law were recently enacted in 1999.The following
other major laws relating to the private sector have been passed since 1993: A Land Law (1992-now
under revision); a Labor Law modeled after the U.S labor code (1997); A tax law was passed in 1997; a
sub decree on Build-Operate-Transfer and most recently, in 1999, a Law on Commercial Enterprise
Registration was adopted. Moreover, the sub-decree on the Implementation of the 1994 Law on
investment was passed in 1997.This is the most attractive Investment Law in the region (see Box 1). The
principal incentives provided by the law on investment are: (a) exemption from import duties for the
period of construction of the project and the first year of business operation and (b) up to eight years'
exemption from corporate profit tax. However, the govemment intends to revise the Law on Investment
as agreed on under the IDA Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC).
7.
The private sector has thus far responded positively to the increasingly liberal business
environment and private sector investment has gone up by fifty percent (Table 2) between 1991 and 1999.
In many respects, the transition from a command economy to a market economy has been smoother than
expected. Nevertheless, the macroeconomic agenda needs to be strengthened and a series of microeconomic and institutional reforms need to be achieved in order to sustain private sector led growth.
Description of the Private Sector
8.
The notion of legitimate private ownership became widespread in Cambodia only very recently in
1989, after many years of socialist rule. The formal private sector is therefore very young. During the
conflict years private initiative was promoted by a few agents engaging in cross-border trading. The end
of the war and the early privatizations of 1989-1991 which consisted of selling, leasing or renting
nationalized small and medium public commercial entities formally established the concept of private
ownership. Together with the cross border traders and business returnees who fled the country this group
makes up the majority of the Cambodianprivate sector.
9.
The Cambodian private sector in 1998 contributed to over 80 percent of GDP, with the public
sector, Government and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) accounting for the rest. There are an estimated
100,000 private commercial entities in Cambodia, with the private sector responsible for more than 90
percent of this number, and foreign owned private businesses make up over 10percent of this total umber.
number. The informal sector is dominated by micro-enterprises and contributes over 5 percent of GDP.

- 87 In 1997 about 1.6 million people were estimated to be involved in the informal sector nationwide. The
types of informal activity vary between the rural and urban areas. In the rural areas it is estimated that
over 40 percent of the families derive additional income from non-farming activities of a seasonal nature
Box 1: Lawon Investment
Chapter 5: InvestmentIncentives
Article 12. The royal govemment shall make available incentives to encourage investments in such important
fields as:
1. Pioneer and or high technology industries
2. Job creation
3. Export-orientedindustries
4. Tourism industry
5. Agroindustry and Transformationindustry
6. Physical Infrastructure and energy
7. Provincial and rural development
8. Environmentalprotection
9. Investments in a Special Promotion Zone (SPZ) as shall be created by law.
Article 13. Incentives shall include the exemption, in whole or in part of duties and taxes.
Article 14. Incentives shall consist of the following:
1. A corporate tax rate of 9 percent except for the exploration and exploitationof natural resources,
timber, oil, mines, gold, and precious stones which shall be set in separate laws.
2. A corporate tax exemption of up to 8 years depending on the characteristics of the project
and the priority of the govemment which shall be mentioned in a Sub Decree. Corporate tax
exemptions shall take effect beginning from the year the project derives its first profit. A 5-year
lossOcarryforward shall be allowed. In the event the profits are being reinvested in the
country, such profits shall be exempted from all corporatetax.
3. Non taxation on the distribution of dividends or profits or proceeds of investment, whether
they will be transferred abroad or distributed in the country.
4. 100 percent import duty exemption on construction materials, means of production, equipment's
intermediate goods, raw materials and spare parts used by:
a. An export-oriented project with a minimum of 80 percent of the production set apart for
export
b. Located in a designated (SPZ) listed in a development priority list by the Council:
c. Tourism Industry
d. Labor intensive industry, transformationindustry, agroindustry; or
Physical Infrastructure
The 100 percent exemption of duties and taxes mentioned above shall be in effect according to terms of
the agreement for investment projects stipulated in the above point 4(a) and for investment projects
which will be located in a SPZ as in 4(b).
Besides the investment projects mentioned in the above points 4(a) and 4(b), the 100 percent exemption
of duties and taxes shall be authorized only during the constructionperiod of the enterprises factories and
buildings and during the first year of business production.
5. 100 percent exemption of export tax, if any
6. The permission to bring into the Kingdom of Cambodian foreign nationals who are:
-Managementpersonnel and experts
-Technical personal
-Skilled workers
-Spouses and dependents of the above persons as authorized by the Council for the
development of Cambodia (CDC) and in Compliancewith the Immigration and Labor law.
Article 15. The approval and incentives granted by the Council for the Development of Cambodia shall not be
transferable or assigned to any third parties.

with minimal capital requirements; these activities include making palm sugar, rice wine, manufacturing
oxcarts, preparing food and engaging in small trade. In the urban areas the informal sector supports the
majority of the population. With very low public sector salaries (US$25-30 per month) most civil servants
depend on some form of informal enterprise to supplement their income. These activities are mostly
home based activities with very flexible hours. Informal activities in the urban areas include retail

- 88 -

services, food preparation and sale, mechanical and electric repair, tailoring, and silk production. The
growing tourist industry is providing new opportunities in the service sector especially to female workers.
Table 2: Percentage Distribution of Employed Persons
by Industrial Category and Stratum (1996)
Stratum
Industrial Category
Total
Urban
Rural
Agriculture, hunting and forestry
80.6
35.1
Fishing
1.0
1.3
Manufacturing
2.2
5.1
Wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles,
7.1
26.8
motorcycle and personal and household goods
Public Administration and defense, compulsory social
3.4
12.8
security
Education
1.7
3.2
Other categories
4.0
15.7
Total
100
100

86.6
0.9
1.8
4.5
2.2
1.5
2.5
100

Source DemographicSurveyof Cambodia,1996,NIS,Ministryof Planning

10.
With the majority of the population living in rural areas, agricultural activity remains the most
important source of revenue, averaging over 40 percent of GDP in the 1998.The main components of this
sector are rubber and crops (rice) 25 percent of GDP, livestock 12 percent, fisheries 4 percent and forestry
6 percent. Agricultural and livestock production are especially very cyclical and depends heavily on
weather conditions. In 1994 agricultural exports as a percent of total exports peaked at 99 percent and in
1998 it accounted for only 34.5 percent of total exports. Forestry in 1998 accounted for 6.1 percent of
GDP and US$180 million of foreign revenue receipts. In its medium term strategy the government
pledged to promote the development of competitive markets for the supply and distribution of agricultural
products. A Credit Community for Rural Development (CCRD) has been established to develop and
coordinate rural credit activities. No direct incentives or benefits however are awarded to the agricultural
sector.
11.
The industrial sector accounted for 17.4 percent of GDP in 1998, with the manufacturing sector,
the most important component, growing at an average eight percent between 1991 and 1998. The
manufacturing sector in 1998 consisted mainly of the garments sector, lumber and agro-industry. The
industrial sector in 1996 employed 4.7 percent of the population, with the garment sector as the largest
employer.2 2 Overall the manufacturing sector is mainly inward-oriented, and dominated by food
processing,beverages and jewelry sub-sectors.
12.
Garment manufacturing, with 62.5 percent of total exports, is the most importantindustrial sector
in Cambodia today. In 1998, US$360 million worth of clothing was exported, with seventy-five percent
of these exports going to the US and to Europe. The main export items are jeans, T-shirts and sweaters.
The number of garment factories has grown from about 36 in 1996 to almost five times this number (151)
in 199923. Less than 10 percent of the estimated 150 garment factories are domestically owned. The Most
Favored Nation Trading status conferred to Cambodia by the U.S. in 1996,the quota-free status conferred
by the European Union and special incentives awarded to the garment industry by the Cambodian
government all contributed to the rapid growth of the sector. In 1998 the garment sector employed about
80,000 workers. The garment industry, however has suffered some set backs. The government signed a
textile agreement with the US in January 1999which tied export quotas to Cambodia's compliance with
labor standards. The quota was based on 1998 production levels but offers 14 percent additional quota if
2' SocioeconomicSurvey, UN 1997.
'3 Garment Manufacturing in Cambodia: Evaluation of Current Status and Review of Options for MPDF 'Part B' Initiatives, (draft) Mekong
Project Development Facility 1999.

- 89 the US government determines that working conditions in the garment industry comply with
internationally recognized core labor standards and Cambodian law. In addition the government recently
relaxed some of the privileges awarded to the sector, and set a minimum wage of $40/month, which is
higher than the national average.

Cambodia:
4 50

Evolution

-

of Key Exports
($ US million

and

Tourism:

1991-1998

)

400-

_

-

-

G a rm en ts

350

-_

300

-_

250

-

_

_

__

_

_

_

_
_

__
_

_
_

_

200-

152
0

___

100

T~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Io
urism

0
1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

13.
Tourism receipts at $63 million accounted for 2.2 percent of GDP in 1998, dropping from $99
million or 3.2 percent of GDP in 1996. Tourism receipts are expected to pick up in coming years. In 1997
the largest number of arrivals by nationality were from Japan (20 percent), Taiwan (12 percent), US (9
percent), France and Malaysia (8 percent). The service sector in 1996 employed 17 percent of the total
labor force. In the tourism sector, multinational chains with predominantly Singaporean and Cambodian
ownership control the luxury end of the industry. 72 percent of all investments in these sector are foreign.
14.
Financial Sector In the early 1990s Cambodia adopted a two-tier banking system, with the
National Bank of Cambodia established as the Central Bank with 22 local branches. 31 commercial banks
form the second tier, broken down as follows, 2 state owned banks, 7 foreign banks, 22 locally
incorporated banks and one representative office. Nine commercial banks have provincial branches.
There are approximately 60 unregulated rural credit schemes and insurance companies, the most
important being EMT/GRET, SEILANITI, HATTA KAKSEKAR. The banking sector is very highly
concentrated with 38 percent (12) of all banks accounting for 75 percent of total deposits in 199824.The
banking sector is dominated by foreign capital. Over 70 percent of banking sector assets are foreign and
most foreign banks do not extend loans to the local companies. The level of financial inter-mediation is
low, total loans outstanding accounted for 5 percent of GDP in 1998. According to official government
statistics non performing loans (NPL) accounted for only 4 percent of total assets in 1998. Infrequent
bank auditing as well as the weak supervisioncapabilities of the Central Bank suggest that the percentage
of NPLs may be much higher. The domestic savings rate is only 5.5 percent and commercial banks play a
very small role in mobilizing domestic savings.
15.
State Owned Enterprises. In 1994/1995there were 11225SOEs in Cambodia, the most important
being: the Rubber Plantations, KAMPEXIM, responsible for the commercialization of rubber; Cambodian
Petroleum Company (CPC) which imports and commercializes petroleum products; Electricite de
Cambodge (EDC), which has, under royal decree of 1996, non-exclusive rights to generate, transmit and
distribute electricity throughout Cambodia; 'La R6gie des Eaux (RdE) which produces and distributes
potable water; and the Cambodian Railway Company (CFC). Other notable SOEs include: the port
authority at Sihanoukville, the Kampuchea shipping agency and SOKJIJTE, producing rice bags.

24
25

Cambodia:Banking Sector: Govemment of Cambodia, Ministry of Economy and Finance. Economic Advisory Team, March 1999
Les EntreprisesPubliques au Cambodge: Etat des lieux et Plan de Reforme.UNDP, January 1995.

-

90

-

16.
In 1995, the Cambodian government adopted the Privatization Law and created a committee for
the privatization of SOEs. The privatization process has been slow and not particularly transparent. Total
privatization receipts in 1998 accounted for 3.4 percent of total government revenue. A large number of
SOEs continue to be subsidized by the state. Recently the government has announced the possible
privatization of the rubber plantations (scheduled not established), and of the Foreign Trade Bank by end
2001.
Total Investments by Origin: 1999

other
23%

China
5%

Approved ASEAN Investment by Country:
Percent of Total, 1994-1998
100% 80%60%-

Cambodia
25%

-

40%20%Hon
Ko

~

II

_-

0%
'/Taiww/8an
Malaysi*a

Malaysi
35%

+

1994
I

1995

Mnesia
.ngapore

1996

Tland

1997

-alaysaTa

1998
'I

_

17.
Foreign Enterprises. Foreign investment in Cambodia has been increasing steadily between 1994
and 1998. The most attractive sectors for foreign investment in 1998 were the gannent sector (38
percent) wood processing (5 percent), hotels (5 percent), agriculture (3 percent) and agroindustry (3
percent). 77 percent of all approved foreign capital investments are in the industrial sector followed by 15
percent in the service sector and eight percent in the agricultural sectors. Cambodia's liberal investment
law, its 'One Stop Shop' for new investors, the General System of Preferences status, low labor cost, and
geographic location, less than 245 km from all major Asian capitals, makes it a prime location for FDI.
High political, personal security and physical risks are in part responsible the attractiveness of the
investment laws. In 1999, Malaysians accounted for 35 percent of all approved total investment, followed
by expatriate Cambodians with 25 percent, Taiwan 7.5 percent, China 5 percent, and Hong Kong 3.60
percent. Together these five groups make up over 70 percent of the total approved FDI in 1999, with the
ASEAN countries accounting for 43 percent of total investment. Of the ASEAN countries and excluding
the investments of Cambodians, Malaysians account for 81 percent of all FDI in 1999.
18.
Domestic Private sector. Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) or firns employing less than 50
employees, characterize the domestic Cambodian private sector. The commercial structure of most of the
firms in the private sector are single ownership entities, basically family owned businesses financed with
social capital. The government estimates the number of SMEs to be about 50,000. Micro-enterprises,
firms with less than nine employees, are the most common SMEs and in 1993-1994 these firms employed
an estimated 13,000 workers26 . The micro enterprises are predominantly in the food and beverage sectors
while the medium to large firms are in the rubber sector.

The Business Environment: Constraints to Private Sector Development
19.
Inadequate infrastructure, mainly the lack of and or poor quality of roads restricting access to
markets and raw materials was perceived as a leading constraint by entrepreneurs consulted. To a lesser
extent the quality of the ports, shortages of electricity and water supply were also identified as problems
for private sector development. Only 12km of Cambodia's roads are paved, less than 15 percent of the
population have access to safe water and electricity. The provision of these services, though minimal, is
concentrated in Phnom Penh and the rural areas are isolated and not equipped to attract investment.

261993-1994 Survey of Industrial Establishments, Royal Govemrnment
of Cambodia.

- 91 -

20.
Political uncertainty and the lack of security, especially physical security was a general concern
among the business community.Weapons have proliferated throughout the country. Acute insecurity was
cited by most entrepreneurs as a strong deterrent for establishing factories in the rural areas especially.
While all businesses concur that improving the condition of infrastructure and especially improving
access into the rural areas is a necessary step toward dis-enclaving the rural populations and providing
incentives for both local and foreign businesses to diversify their investments away from Phnom Penh
insecurity remains the major constraint to business diversification.If not promptly addressed, security
concerns may endanger the growth of agroindustry, a promising sector for Cambodia.
21.
Complaints about the high level of taxes abound especially from export-oriented firms, despite
the very attractive investment incentives provided for by the law on investment. The one percent
minimum turn-over tax is perceived by entrepreneurs to be regressive. The recent increase in the VAT tax
from 4 percent to 10 percent is considered very high. The need for the government to broaden the tax base
was expressed. Some 5 percent of the businesses, mostly foreign, paid over 85 percent of all the VAT
taxes. Managers complain that the contributing capacity of the legal businesses is being overly stretched.
Tax evasion by the local business community is very high, this is accompanied with a lot of smuggling
activity. The turnover tax and the increase in VAT have reportedly increased the degree of smuggling
occurring in Cambodia. In addition entrepreneurs complain of the delays in receipts of tax refunds.
22.
Weaknesses in the legal system, are considered very serious obstacles to private sector
development. Low public sector salaries, fleeting inflation in the early 1990's, the discontinuation of food
subsidy schemes all contributed to the lowering of actual wages over time. This situation has contributed
to increasing the levels of corruption in Cambodia. Corruption is reportedly widespread at all levels of
government and increasing in price. While most investors in Cambodia are familiar with the corruption
issue from their experience in other developing countries, the level in Cambodia seems to have exceeded
the level acceptable to investors, especially U.S. investors2 7 . Inadequate enforcement of laws and poor
harmonization of existing laws further complicates the situation. The discretionary nature of the courts in
the application of the law emerged as a fundamental problem for the business community. Cambodia is
perceived to have a "culture of impurity".
23.
The lack of any central and comprehensivepublication of existing laws, as is frequent in many
countries, lies at the root of many problems confronting the private sector. The frustration that this has
engendered in the private sector cannot be underestimated. Presently, laws are not officially published,
but disseminated on an ad hoc basis by ministries. Moreover, laws are not made available formally to the
private sector until after they have been enacted. In some cases this contradicts basic principals of
administrative law which require notice and comment from the public in many instances before a law is
promulgated. Many laws have been drafted by well trained foreign experts who however have little or no
knowledge of the realities of the business environment. in Cambodia. This policy creates considerable
uncertainty. This also opens the door to discretionary application of regulations and creates enormous
frustration for the private sector. Within and between ministries, different departments may not have
access to or knowledge of regulations passed by other parts of the ministry.
24.
One means of addressing this problem could be for the government to publish the laws of
Cambodia on a weekly basis and allow the public to purchase such publications at a reasonable price.
However, to be effective, such publications must contain ALL legal instruments and these instruments
must be published shortly after promulgation. At present, ministries must themselves pay to get copies of
regulations passed by other ministries. So the collection and publication of all lawsis a complex exercise,
but would greatly improve transparency. Lack of published information hurts the smaller firms as they
have less access to the draft laws and or investment incentives provided by the government.
25.
It has been suggested that Cambodia needs a law on the promulgation and force of the various
legal instruments issued by the government: a sort of administrative law. It is unclear at present which
government edicts have authority over others;which levels are superior and take precedence over others,
how a regulation that contradicts a law can be challenged.

- 92 26. SMEs identify the dearth of Tegulationson land tenure as an important handicap to small business
development. (See Annex C for a discussion of land issues). Speculation on land increases prices of land
for small businesses making it prohibitive. Without clear land laws, foreign investors especially are
reluctant to invest heavily in the sector. Recent dispossession of land by the govemrnent from some
foreign investors has accentuated the climate of uncertainty regarding the issue. A revised Land Lawdraft
considered by the Council of Ministers in 1998 is perceived by the private sector as not going far enough
in solving the issues, and is still under discussionbetween government, businesses and NGOs.
27.
The cost of, and access to finance is also mentioned as an important constraint, especially by the
smaller entrepreneurs. The availability of rural and micro finance is crucial for the development of rural
Cambodia. Forty-eight percent, or 16 provinces in Cambodia today have no financial institutions2 8 . With
high real interest rates per month, many micro and small enterprises are kept out of the market.
Inadequate regulation and supervision of financial institutions have also given rise to ruthless money
lending schemes in some areas usually resulting in the illegal confiscation of private property in situations
of default. Informal credit providers use land titles in most cases as security for loans. Defaulting on loans
in one of the ways in which rural Cambodians lose their land. Lack of adequate regulatory and contractual
reinforcement make trade finance impossible.
28.
In addition, several businesses have expressed concern about inadequate market infornation on
consumer trends and shortages of skilled labor. In the garment sector entrepreneurs complain about the
lack of skilled managers, and have called for an increase in the number of vocational training schools.
Recommendationsby Businesses
Based on the constraints identified above, the following issues require close attention:
29.
Improving the quality of the judicial system, by increasing the transparency of the judicial
process. Extensive dissemination of new laws pertaining to the private sector as well as dissemination of
legal decisions would increase the transparency of the system. An appropriate incentive regime for judges
should be established. Most importantly, the capacity to enforce judgements needs to be strengthened
through training of enforcing agencies. In Cambodia judges are not almost never transferred, creating
potential for corruption. More frequent rotations of judges around the country could reduce the extent of
alleged clientelism in the judicial system.
30.
Harmonization of laws. Cambodia's dual heritage (French and Anglo-Saxon) resulted in the
adoption of both Common and Civil law codes into the legal system. The lack of harmonization of the
judicial codes allows for broad and conflicting interpretations of the law resulting in differing
applications.
31.
Enacting a backlog of commercial legislation. Over the years Cambodia has relied heavily on
foreign consultants for the drafting of major laws. The lack of capacity within government for reviewing
laws has resulted in a backlog of legal drafts and sub-decrees in different ministries with no public
officials confident enough to introduce them for adoption by parliament. The following laws exist in draft
and revised draft versions, Draft Product Liability Law (revised draft); Draft Bankruptcy Law of 1997
(revised draft); Draft Law of Contracts (revised draft); Draft Law of Commercial Enterprises (revised
draft); Draft Marks Protection Act Trademarks and Service Marks (revised draft). Adoption of these laws
would significantly improve the private sector environment in Cambodia. In addition the following laws
were considered important by the private sector for building a strong efficient private sector: amended
Land Law2 9; Company Law; amendments to the Contract Law regarding secured transactions and leases;
Law on Civil Procedure ; Law on enforcement of Foreign Arbitral awards; Administrative Law (law on

27 US-ASEAN business
28

council briefing.
Asiandevelopment bank, Draft Final report for the Rural Credit and Savings project, 1998.
29The following amendments are recommended: Amendments to the land law to clarify mortgage interests in real property, and procedures for
foreclosure of such interest. Amendments to the land law and contract law to clarify the legal status of lease and lessee's rights against breach of
contract (i.e. specific enforcement for long term contracts, etc.). Amendments to the land law to clarify ownership of structures on leased land.
Amendments to the land law to clarify rights of bona-fide purchasers and obligations of lien holders to register liens.

- 93 promulgation and force of laws and regulations). Further laws, of lesser priority, are trademark laws on
Industrial Estates, Product Liability, Bankruptcy, Competition, Arbitration and Secured Transactions.
32.
Maintaining Cambodia's competitivenessin light of accession to ASEAN. The government was
urged to ensure that existing tariffs, quotas and price control mechanism do not adversely affect the
competitiveness of the economy. The government should also guard against significance appreciation of
the Riel.
33.
Improving investment monitoring. Cambodia has a very limited direct investment monitoring
system3 0. The partial measures undertaken to check compliance with incentive conditions fall short of
constituting a comprehensive system. The current incentive system, as designed and administered, is
expectation-based with little or no inducement for the investor to report performance to the CDC. The
system is perceived by the private sector, to be neither equitable, efficient or simple. It is characterized by
a lack of focus; an inappropriate reliance on tax holidays; the potential for substantial revenue loss
through the provision of unnecessarily generous incentives; and the potential for significant leakage and
abuse of duty exempt import privileges. Any rational reform of the current system of investment
incentives requires substantial changes in the choice of incentive instruments. In addition instead of
investing time in evaluating and screening applications the CDC would be advised to redeploy resources
from regulation to promotion and monitoring to ensure that investments meet country expectations and
standards. This shift in emphasis however, would require the CDC to develop a detailed organizational
model of how it would operate within this new role. A new unit to administer import privileges would be
required and the existing Project Monitoring Unit within the CDC would need to be refocused and
reskilled and provided with an appropriate budget and management to enforce existing incentives in any
transitional and grand-fatheringphase and to evaluate the effectiveness of the CDC3".
34.
Introduction of a large taxpayer monitoring system. While revenue mobilization continues to be
an important priority for the government, the introduction of the minimumone percent turnover tax has
clearly been perceived by many businesses as a disincentive for productive activity and has increased
smuggling. Many developing countries that rely on a small subset of businesses for over 70 percent of
their taxes have introduced special large taxpayer monitoring systems to improve tax collection3 2 . The
advantages of such a system are the following. With limited human resources the government can fully
exercise its control over a large part of the tax receipts base. Large taxpayers, as is the case in Cambodia,
generally operate in the area of foreign trade and have highly qualified lawyers and accountants and
sometimes use forms of avoidance that are difficult to detect, or benefit from internal preferential
treatments. Establishing a special monitoring system with highly specialized personnelcan reduce the rate
of evasion. The large taxpayer monitoring system has been applied in many developing countries as a first
step toward a comprehensive tax administration reform. It leads to an improved understanding of the tax
administration and it legal provisions by both public and private facilitating its expansion. The mere
introduction of the system can lead to a significant increase in revenue collected as it reducesthe potential
for corruption, noncompliance and discretionary exemptions. While concentrating on the large taxpayers
is important the government also needs to devise alternative measures to broaden the tax base. Providing
an adequate incentive regime for all tax collectors such as increasing the remuneration would increase
revenue, so would an active policy by the government to combat cross border smuggling.3 3 Pertaining to
the fiscal incentives in the investment law information on the overall fiscal cost of doing business in a
high risk environment will need to be done in order to fully internalize the effects to FDI of an increase or
decrease in the VAT and the introduction of the 1 percent minimum profit tax.
35.
Promoting private participation in infrastructure (PPI). In the area of infrastructure services,
efforts should be directed at developing sector wide policies promoting increased participation of the
private sector and increased competition. The most important problems in the area of infrastructure and
Cambodia: Monitoring Direct Investment. Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS), 1997.
In May, 1997, FIAS completed a project which proposed a monitoring system for the implementation of approved foreign investment projects.
FIAS is interested in helping to implement this investment monitoring scheme if requested by the Govemment.
32
Administration of Large Taxpayers Intemational Monetary Fund 1994.
33 The government has started to implement many of these measures. See SectionII of the CAS above.
30
3'

- 94 private participation are common to all sectors, power, water, telecommunications and transportation
(ports and railways). The first is an inadequate legal and regulatory framework combined with unclear
allocation of responsibilities between regulatory and operational institutions. Problems of insufficient
competition or unregulated private sector agents, uneconomic rates, inefficient providers lack of expertise
to design and implement coherent policies in infrastructure abound. In the power sector for example,
Ownership of Electricite de Cambodge (EDC) is held jointly by the Ministries of Industry, Mines and
Energy (MIME) and Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF).
36.
While in Cambodia private participation in infrastructure exists to a large extent in the water
sewerage and power sectors the government has been unable to create an independent regulatory bodies
to oversee the performance of all these agencies. The anticipated Electricity Act is set to create an
independent regulatory body for the 'EDC'. If well managed regulatory agencies would be able to provide
a coherent strategy aimed at maximizing the benefits of private provision and ensuring that adequate
competitive and qualitative standards are met. The following short to medium term measures are also
recommended for the EDC:
*

Formulating and adopting competitive procedures for the selection of Independent Power Producers
(IPPs). In Cambodia there is proven interest of private investors: what needs to improve is the entry
process
* Reviewing power services in provincial towns and develop a rural electrification action plan.
* Restoring EDC's financial health and examining the possibility of privatizing or offering EDC to
4.
strategic foreign investors as early as possible3
37.
There is significant investment in private sanitation infrastructure in Cambodia and also some
private investment in public sanitation infrastructure. In contrast, there is virtually no state investment in
public sanitation. Nevertheless, the available private infrastructure is technically inadequate, and the poor
do not have adequate access. Responsibility for urban sanitation in Cambodia is fragmented andunclear.
For example, at the national level, responsibility for technical regulation of private sanitation
infrastructure comes under the Commission on Urban Construction. On the other hand, responsibility for
regulating the discharge of wastewater from industry and municipalities into receiving waters rests the
Ministry of Environment. To improve the provision of adequate water and sanitation services the Royal
government of Cambodia needs to develop a comprehensive sector strategy, allowing for the increase
participation of the private sector in service provision especially in areas where cost recovery methods are
easy to implement and needs are clearly identified. The restructuring ofRegie des Eaux (RdE) should be
prioritized and a privatization plan established. Improving rural water and sanitation should be the
governments priority and a central agency should oversee the provision mechanisms adequate for
increasing supply in these areas.
38.
The privatization of state-owned enterprises should be actively reintroduced into the development
agenda. (see Box 2) As in many transition economies most Cambodian SOEs suffer from important
management problems, have lost their monopoly power and, suffer from huge budget cuts. Structural
deficiencies such as aging capital equipment, worsening financial positions, absence of clear leadership,
obsolete delivery systems and low quality staffing, lack of skilled trained personnel are issues faced by a
majority of the SOEs. With only 9 percent of GDP generated in revenue, government subsidizing of
inefficient SOEs is not an optimal policy. The privatization committee should appraise all current SOEs
and under the privatization law, actively seek to disengage the government from the management and
ownership of some public enterprises. The pace and procedure of the privatization process should be
monitored closely and transparency of the process ensured.

34While it may be difficult to privatze the EDC in the short term due to its serious financial problems and the uncertain regulatory and
investment climnate,privatization is a medium-term goal, and the Bank Group's work in the energy sector will help the government to make the
appropriate preparations for privatization including negotiations with potential foreign strategic investors. In the short term, the Bank Group will
assist the EDC in identifying and negotiating with a strategic foreign utility to help strengthen its financial performance via an appropriately
structured incentive-based management contract. In this regard, it will be critical to ensure that the chosen partner has a vested interest in the
EDC's performance.

- 95 Box 2: Privatization,Savings and Growth

The positivelink betweenprivatizationand growthhas important implicationsfor
countriestrying to get on a sustainablegrowth path but with insufficientsavingsto
stimulatethe economy. Well-managedprivatizationsalong with other structuralreforms
on the legal and regulatoryfront and trade liberalizationhave helped to fuel the growth
process.Privatizationcould increasesavingsfortwo reasons. If the transferof ownership
and managementto the private sector is efficientlyundertaken,(appropriatebuyers are
foundforthe SOE)productivitylevelsof the firmshouldincreasewith increaseefficiency.
Higher productivityin turn generatesmore resourcesfor savings.Privatizationsprovide
level playing fields in some industrieswhere public ownershipdistorts the market
structure.With an regulatoryframeworkprivatizationshouldresult in increasedand fair
competitionand often lowerprices and or better qualityfor the consumers.Privatization
especiallyin the utility sector such as telecommunications
and power generallyattracts
savingsfromabroad,openingthe economyup to resourcesotherwiseunavailable.
39.
Increasing access to financialservices. The availability and provision of financial services is very
limited and poorly developed in Cambodia. Banking sector penetration is very low, only about 10 percent
of the population has access to the formal banking sector. To strengthen the financial architecture the
government needs to modernize the legal and regulatory framework for financial intermediation, close
down undercapitalized banks and promote encourage competition among restructured banks. The
government is advised needs to strengthen the National Bank of Cambodia and enhance its supervision
functions by training new staff, so far no institution is accredited with setting accounting auditing
standards for banks. Auditing and accounting procedures of the banking sector should be transparent and
consistent with international norms. Other issues in the banking sector include the need to adopt a Secure
Transactions Law in order to mitigate the risks of lending; provide regulation on risks management;
improve the overall transparency of the banking sector; adopt the Basle Capital Adequacy Standard in
order to insure the system against undue failures and bankruptcies; adopt internationally accepted
provisioning for non-performing loans, adopt a Bankruptcy Law and apply prudential regulations on a
consolidated basis. Under the current IMF/PRGF program the govemment is scheduled to carry out
extensive banking sector reform.
40.
Specifically addressing the needs of the rural population, the government is advised to encourage
the development of rural and micro-creditfinance organizations. Mostly provided by NGOs at present,
micro-credit programs have expanded rapidly since 1991,reaching 215,000beneficiaries in 1998, over 10
percent of the population. Demand for rural credit is estimated to be in the range of $100-$150 million.In
February 1993, ACLEDA was established as a national NGO with the support of the ILO and UNDP for
micro and small enterprise promotion and after a period of market testing, evolved into a specialized
microfinance NGO providing credit to micro and small business entrepreneurs in Cambodia. ACLEDA
has demonstrated exceptional financial performance and has developed into a profitable, commerciallyoriented microfinance institution providing credit to the under-served Cambodian market. As an NGO,
ACLEDA relied on donor funds for continued expansion and was largely working in an unregulated
environment. Recognizing that its regulatory and legal status was becoming increasingly untenable to
continue its growth and meet customer's demands, ACLEDA has embarked on a transformation process
to become a licensed, commercial bank which will be regulated by the National Bank of Cambodia.Since
1998, IFC, through the Mekong Project Development Facility (MPDF), has played a leading role in
assisting ACLEDA with its transformation into a commercial bank. In their advisory capacity, IFC and
MPDF have assisted ACLEDA in developing and instituting appropriate operational policies and
procedures to improve profitability and manage risks; refining organizational structure in line with the
requirements of a commercial bank; adopting international best banking practices; structuring and
executing the transformation; and mobilizing outside investors and partners to complete the
transformation.

- 96 41.
The government has also established a Credit Community for Rural Development (CCRD) to
develop and coordinate rural credit activities. The government is advised, however, to avoid the
implementation of subsidized or direct credit schemes, as such interventions by governments in areas
where the private sector operates more efficiently have often undermined the development of the rural
micro-financesystem and distorted the incentive structure leading to increased market inefficiencies.
42.
The government is also encouraged to provide business support services, such as business
development design and feasibility study training courses to the local communities. The formulation of a
policy agenda developing the legal and regulatory framework that allows for diversity in institutional
structures and credit delivery schemes for both formal and non-formal financial institutions would
improve access of the rural population to credit and ensure property security.
43.
The Cambodian private sector does not benefit from any network relationships. As a result of
conflict social capital was totally destroyed, and it will take a while before the community builds the
necessary support systems that ensure the viability of such small economic entities. Experiences from
Italy, Chile and Mexico have emphasized the role played by strong networks and associations in
developing productive industries with forward and backward linkages. While the government cannot
legislate the creation of business associations it could encourage their existence and provide no additional
disincentives for such organizations.
Conclusions
44.
Cambodia has accomplished a great deal in the area of private sector development. The dynamic
and industrious nature of private enterprise is evidenced by the level of private sector participation in
traditional public sector markets, such as water and electricity provision. However the severe complaints
received from the private sector on issues impeding growth imply that the enterprises are not operating at
their full and efficient capacity.
45.
The inadequacies in the legal and regulatory framework appear to be among the most important
impedimentsto private sector development. In the informal and domestic sectors social networks generate
strong and permanent bonds upon which contracts are negotiated and implemented. Policies to safeguard
Box 3: Principal World Bank Group Assistance in the Area of Private Sector Development
*
*
*

*

*

Rule of Law: Assist the government in developing a consistent and harmonized legal and judicial system, in the
framework of the Sector Wide Approach (SWAP) on Legal/JudicialReform
Governance: Strengthenpublic institutions and improve transparencyin the areas of fiscal reforrn.
Privatization: Assist government in restructuring and evaluating impact of privatizing SOEs on the budget and
overall economic growth. In the context of the Country Framework Report the WVBGintends to assist the
Government of Cambodia in improving the legal and regulatory franework in order to facilitate the privatization
of SOEs as well as provide support in identifying potential investors.
Investment Promotion: The World Bank Group is scheduled to provide technical assistance services to the
Council for the Development of Cambodia to enhance the institution's capacity to promote and facilitate inward
investment. In addition we will provide assistance to the Government to move from discretionary, expectation
based investment incentives to automatic, performance based incentives available to all qualifying investment
expenditures.
Finance: IFC presently has two small business funding lines, aimed at improving access to finance for Cambodia.
One project, ACLEDA, which is nearing completion. The Facility has also begun work on two other projects and
assuming the business environment continues to improve, these projects could submitted taken for financing to the
IFC Board.

these practices should be implemented and national policies of transparency developed along these lines.
While corruption is reportedly widespread, the real burden to the financial sector is not known at this
moment. An ongoing IDA diagnostic work on governance (expected to be completed in Spring 2000)
should shed some light on the nature and extent of this problem. The government is expected to prepare
an Action Plan to tackle priority governance corruption issues.

- 97 -

46.
Improving financial resources available to rural farmers would contributeto revitalizing the rural
areas. Despite the fact that many NGOs provide some form of rural credit a huge shortage persists. Larger
firms face less severe constraints In the area of financing, the International Finance Corporation/United
Nations Development Program/International Labor Organization with ACLEDA have what is now
considered a successful Cambodian grassroots financing credit scheme. IDA/IFC could work further on
improving the regulatory framework and providing additional capital to expand the operation along
accepted guidelines. Public sector involvement in the direct provision of credit has from past experience
not been very successful.
47.
Enhancing security in both the rural and urban areas by having trained security staff will serve to
widen the market scope for potential investors. In the field of human resources, most firms mentioned
having to train their own staff due to the lack of skilled labor.
48.
Besides removing remaining barriers to private provision of services the government should
promote the establishment of private providers. Privatization of some state owned enterprises should be
considered in the short to medium term. Improvements of infrastructure services especially out of the
main urban areas would help generate more balanced development and attract enterprises out of the urban
centers.
49.
The creation of business organizations should help facilitate more efficient distribution of
information. The MPDF is currently working on creating a few business associations. It would be
interesting to watch this initiative develop and see if the model could be reproduced across sectors and
regions
50.
Implementing the policy agenda outlined above requires strong government commitment and
sustained leadership. Cambodia's most promising route to rapid growth is to achieve a virtuous circle of
increased savings, investment and growth through higher public savings, and increased private sector
investments due to the adoption of structural reforms. Sustained private sector led growth would bring
potentially important rewards in terms of overall economic development, job creation and poverty
reduction.
ACTIVITIESOFTHEWORLDBANKGROUP IN CAMBODIA

MIGA Investment Promotion Advisory Services
51.
MIGA's Investment Marketing Services Departmentwill provide technical assistance services to
the Council for the Development of Cambodia to enhance the institution's capacity to promote and
facilitate investment. The main counterpart within the CDC is the Cambodia Investment Board (CIB).
The expected outcomes of the assistance are the following:
•

An official web site for CDC, an internet database that will contain over 300 pages of electronic
information on the business climate and investment opportunities in Cambodia.

*

Over 200 hours of investment promotion training time to professionals of the CIB and CDC which
will cover, among other things, techniques on developing a investment promotion strategy for the
agency, methods in servicing investors and monitoring on-the-ground investment.

*

Promotion materials for CIB.

-

98 -

International Finance Corporation-IFC/ Mekong Project DevelopmentFacility-MPDF
52.
The Cambodia Power Company project. IFC approved a $67 million loan in FY 1998 for this
60MW combined cycle project. IFC is working actively with the sponsors to achieve financial closure as
soon as possible.
53.
Novotel hotel project in Siem Reap near Angkor Wat, approved by IFC in May 1997 and dropped
this year. Investors representing 60% ownership could not continue with the project due to the Asian
financial crisis. The remaining sponsors could not find alternative equity funding to cover the shortfall.
IFC is now considering a different new investment in the proposed Imperial Angkor Palace (a US$18
million hotel) in Siem Reap, which is sponsored by another group of foreign investors.
54.
Financial Sector/microfinance Following a year-long IFC/MPDF technical assistance program
designed to support the institutional strengthening of ACLEDA Bank, IFC recently approved a US$1.5
million investment in ACLEDA Bank. ACLEDA Bank is a new microfinance bank, which is being
created from the transformation of the existing ACLEDA NGO into a regulated financial institution with
outside shareholders (DEG, FMO and Triodos Bank). IFC hopes that ACLEDA Bank will be opened by
year-end and a banking license applicationhas been filed.
55.
MPDF is now actively exploring how best to build-up its operations in Cambodia. Since scaling
down its activities in July 1997, the Facility's Cambodia program has been limited to assisting in the
commercialization of a micro-finance institution, ACLEDA, as well as providing some business plan
training rural small enterprises. The following activities have now been launched:
* Project Development: The MPDF is currently considering a couple of projects for financing. Given
the shallowness of the domestic financial sector, financing for these deals will likely be limited to allequity financing, or financing possibly from IFC and other IFIs. IFC presently has two small business
funding lines, which would be used for SME projects in Cambodia. One project, which is nearing
completion, is ACLEDA, which could be taken to IFC to funding, as well as some other international
lenders, within the next three months. The Facility has also begun work on two other projects and
assuming the environment for business continues to improve, these could be taken for financing in the
3rdquarter.
* Support Services: Given the country's tumultuous history, including the loss of so many skilled
nationals over the past twenty years it is not surprising that support services available to the private
sector are very underdeveloped. In addition, few donors are presently focussing on private sector
development. As a result there should be considerable scope for MPDF Part B involvement in this
sector for the foreseeable future. Scale Up and Scale Down: Many of the Part B programs MPDF will
initiate in Cambodia will be based on packages developed by the Facility elsewhere in the region.
Activities like bank training for project lending, training for SME managers, and assistance for the
garment sector are all examples of programs currently in use by the Facility, and which could be
adopted to meet the needs of companies in Cambodia. It is anticipated however that the average firm
size that MPDF will work with in Cambodia will likely be smaller than has been the case in Vietnam,
and possibly Lao PDR. Finally, as has been the case elsewhere, the process of program development
will typically involve the launching of pilot program, and if successful, later scaled up.
Outline of Activities
Part A: 2nd Q-Undertake sector surveys (possibly garments and tourism). Completion of ACLEDA.
3 rd Q-4t Q- Establish a Part A presence in Phnom Penh. Complete two to three projects.
Part B: 2nd Q-Survey of the formal private sector. Review of donor private sector programs and of
private sector support services currently available. Possible mini-review of the banking sector.
3rdQ-4' Q-Needs assessments and possible pilot launching of training related to: banking and
long-term lending; business plan training; and the garment sector-related assistance.
Have a full-time MPDF professional in Phnom Penh by mid-2000 following the recruitment of a
Part B Project Officer. Possible stationing of a Part A IO/Head of Country in the 3 rd quarter.

- 99 -

ANNEXF: PORTFOLIO
ANDFINANCIALMANAGEMENT
ISSUES

General Porffolio Issues
1.
As of December 31, 1999, the Cambodia portfolio contained ten active projects, representing a
total commitment of US$246 million, including US$93 million disbursed. The portfolio is still relatively
young: only two projects have closed, and the active projects have an average age of a little over two
years. Disbursements were steady even during the period when the political situation was unstable,
although the disbursement ratio has been declining this fiscal year (6.7 percent at end-December 1999).
Compositionof the Portfolio
2.
There are two projects in rural development. The Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project
(APIP) (FY97) has as its development objective sustainable and broad-based improvement of smallholder
agricultural productivity as a means to improved food security and increased rural incomes. The
Northeast Village Development Project (FY99) is a Learning and Innovation Loan (LIL) which will test
decentralized, participatory, poverty-oriented rural development approaches in some of the poorest areas
in Cambodia; the experience gained by the government at managing such programs will assist it to
formulate and implement a cohesive national rural development strategy over the medium term.
3.
Social Sector projects include two Social Fund Projects (FY95 and FY99). Social Fund I has
supported the government's efforts to reduce poverty through small-scale rehabilitation and reconstruction
projects in social and economic infrastructure, providing short-term employment and community
development opportunities and increasing capacity in developing investment criteria for local
infrastructure. Social Fund II continues the interventions begun under the first project, but aims also to
strengthen donor co-ordination and co-financing, and improve poverty and district targeting. The aim of
the Disease Control and Health Development Project (FY97) is reduction of mortality and morbidity
from preventable diseases, particularly malaria, Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS; rehabilitation of the health
system infrastructure and improvement of public health management. An Education Quality
Improvement LIL (FY00) was approved in August 1999. It aims to develop a demonstration model of a
participatory approach to school quality improvement and performance-basedresource management.
4.
There are three infrastructure projects. The Phnom Penh Power Project (FY96) supported the
rehabilitation of the Phnom Penh electricity distribution system; the government's efforts to strengthen
utilities; and creation of an environment conducive to future private sector participation. TheUrban Water
Supply Project (FY98) aimed to improve drinking water coverage, quality and access in Phnom Penh and
Sihanoukville while helping the government develop and implement a sectoral investment program based
on a well-articulated water and sanitation policy framework. The Road Rehabilitation project (FY99)
arises to improve access to rural areas and build the framework for future sector reform; this project
includes a cultural heritage component, with the rehabilitation of ancient bridges.
Table1: PortfolioMonitoringIndicators
FY98
FY99
Numberof Projectsin the Portfolio
7
9
AverageImplementation
Period(years)
2.1
2.2
Disbursementin FY
29.10
21.77
DisbursementRatio(%)
27
21
Number( %) of Projectsat Risk
1(17)
2 (22)
Number(%) of ProblemProjects
0 (0)
1(11)
(DevelopmentalObjectives&/or
Implementation
Progress)
RealismIndex( %)
-10(
50
ProactivityIndex( %)
100
100

FY00 /1
10
2.2
n.a.
n.a.
2(20
1(10)
56
10

- 100

-

5.
The Technical Assistance Project (FY95) has been supporting Cambodia's transition to a market
economy by helping to implement the government's economic reform program through strengthening the
government's economic management team; helping to put in place the foundations for a legal
environment conductive to private sector development; and financing studies in priority development
sectors. It has recently been restructured to support implementationof the government' new medium-term
reform program supported by the IMF PRGF and the IDA SAC.
6.
Until recently, the portfolio has been relatively healthy since the first credit was approved in
FY94. One project, Social Fund I, has consistently been rated highly satisfactory. However, nearly all of
the projects in the portfolio suffered delays either in preparation or implementation due to the political
uncertainties from July 1997 to December 1998. Moreover, there has been a marked deterioration in
portfolio performance. Of ten projects in the portfolio, one project, the oldest the portfolio (Technical
Assistance Credit) is a problem project and another (Disease Control and Health Development) is
considered at risk. Both projects have time-bound action plans to improve performance. In part, the lower
ratings reflect IDA's determination to confront project problems more realistically than in the past, so that
action plans for improvement can be instituted before much deterioration in the project has taken place.
However, the major reasons for deterioration are the systemic generic issues which have always
threatened to undermine portfolio performance, i.e. weak capacity in project preparation and
management, slowness in providing counterpart funding, procurement problems, and weak financial
management.
7.
The quality of IDA supervision of two projects was assessed under the Rapid Supervision
Assessment by the Bank Group's Quality Assurance Group in 1998. The quality of supervision in both
was found to be satisfactory, including the focus on development impact, supervision of fiduciary aspects,
and adequacy of supervision inputs and processes. However, the project perfornance ratings in one
project (Technical Assistance Project) were considered to unrealistic. The project has since been rated
unsatisfactory for Implementation Progress.
Project

TechnicalAssistance

Table 2: Projects at Risk and Contributing Factors
At Risk
Risk Factors
Status

1. Project management problems; 2. Problems with
managementof consultants;3. Poorfinancialperformance;4.
Procurementproblems;5. Shortageof counterpartfunds; 6.
Poorcompliancewithlegal covenants,
Disease Control & Health Potential 1. Shortageof counterpartfumds;2. Significantdisbursement
Development

Actual

delays; 3. Poor interagency coordination

Key Issues
Weak Preparation and Implementation Capacity. Over the years, IDA has supported institution
building through Institutional Development Facility (IDF) grants as well as projects. The project
preparation and implementation capacity is being slowly built up, but there is still a heavy reliance on
foreign experts to serve as technical advisors. A matter of real concern is the extent to which technical
advisors provide adequate training and knowledge transfer to local counterparts during their tenure in
Cambodia. Experience has shown that local counterparts were not always available to work with foreign
experts and that when experts were absent often little progress was made, indicating that experts may be
failing to provide adequate on the job training to their counterparts. It has been agreed that for the future
all technical assistance contracts financed by IDA will include specific benchmarks for training, and
consultants' payments will be dependent on their performance in enabling the counterparts to assume their
full duties.
8.

- 101

-

9.
Counterpartfunding. Delays in providing adequate counterpart funding have been experienced
with the Disease Control and Health Development Project. The problem is related to the broader need to
reorient public expenditures to the social sectors, and to absorptive capacity.
10.
Procurement. Delays in preparing procurement documentation have caused delays in a number
of projects. This is especially evident in the Disease Control project where procurement of medical
equipment is being done through UNICEF. There have also been cases of misprocurement, e.g., in the
Urban Water Supply Project vehicles appear not to have been used for purposes intended under the credit.
IDA's portfolio improvement efforts should include measures to improve training of counterpart staff in
procurement as well as in consultant selectionprocedures.
11.
Allowances for counterpart staff Recent supervision of the Technical Assistance Credit has
revealed a substantial number of Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) staff (full time civil servants)
receiving monthly allowances to manage IDA's portfolio: disbursement and procurement processing,
project monitoring, preparation of quarterly reports. This includes the majority of staff in MEF's World
Bank Unit, Debt Unit and Bilateral Unit. Initially these allowances were designed as'training incentives.'
Payment of allowances is widely practiced by other donors, including payments to attend meetings and
seminars. However the situation has become unsustainable and MEF was advised to phase out allowance
payments under the TA Credit by end-December 1999. IDA will have to consider what alternate
mechanisms can be put in place in MEF or within the World Bank office to ensure continued portfolio
monitoring that do not involve cash payments from existing projects.

12.
Inter-agency coordination. There have been reports of implementation delays on account of poor
coordination between MEF and implementing agencies. This needs to be carefully monitored in project
supervision.
Action Plan for Portfolio Improvement
13.
IDA intends to hold the first Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) meeting in June
2000. The meeting would be proceeded by the preparation of a Portfolio Improvement Plan, which would
be prepared in consultation with the country team, and local project managers and government officials.
Other donors, particularly ADB will be invited to participate.
14.
In addition, the problem project and project at risk will be supervised more intensively. The task
manager of the Phnom Penh Power Project is now stationed in the World Bank office in Lao PDR for a
period of three years, which will give him better access to field visits on this project, as well as providing
support on procurement issues for all projects. Additional procurement staff have also been added in the
World Bank offices in Thailand to help with procurement issues in the region.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT ISSUES

15.
Two main themes underlie the lack of achievement of satisfactory portfolio financial
management arrangements in Cambodia. The first is a lack of technical capacity in the areas of
accounting, reporting and auditing, the second is the governance environment in Cambodia which
engenders a lack of accountability at the individual project level. Specific difficulties which need to be
addressed during the CAS period include the:
Lack of adequately experienced accounting staff within the civil service which results in the need to
recruit external staff for each new project. Among the implications of this are:
The need to create Project Management Units, in the line ministries, for each new project. This then
involves employing externally recruited staff (such as accountants, procurement specialists, and

- 102 -

*

*
*

engineers), who leave after project implementation without any capacity building being achieved
within the government to implement projects;
An inability to meet IDA's requirement that a satisfactory project financial management system be in
place before the project can proceed. Frequently, there is a need to recruit external consultants to
satisfy this requirement but, the government does not have the funds to do so until after the project is
declared effective;
Delays to projects being declared effective, where the appointment of key staff are effectiveness
conditions and there are difficulties in identifying and recruiting the relevant staff.; and
The additional administrative burden, in terms of ensuring adherence to IDA procurement rules,
imposed on the government in trying to manage an ever-increasingnumber of consultants.

Lack of IDA resources both in terms of the availability of Financial Management Specialists to join
periodic supervision missions and a lack of staff in the field to assist in project implementation matters.
The implications of this are:
*

Lack of timely intervention by IDA when projects are experiencing difficulties in complying with
IDA's financial management requirements or its disbursement procedures, leading to delays in project
implementation.
* Difficulties on IDA's part in adequately supervising the portfolio particularly with regard to carrying
out periodic reviews of Statements of Expenditures; and
* Slow progress on IDA's part in reviewing projects approved on or after July 1, 1995 but before June
30, 1998 with the objective of ensuring their financial management systems meet IDA's minimum
requirements in accordance with the Loan Administration Change Initiative (LACI).
Lack of systematic approach and capacity on the part of the government for evaluating the technical
competence and appointment of auditors working on IDA projects. The implications of this are:
•

Auditors being appointed under inadequate terms of reference resulting in poor quality audit reports
which provide limited or no assurance either to the government and IDA on project progress; and
* Auditors being selected under on a least cost basis alone often resulting in the appointment of
inadequately experienced, staffed and competent audit firms, again resulting in poor quality output.
Inadequate dissemination of information about IDA lending operations in Cambodia increasing the
perception risk, given the governance environment in Cambodia, that IDA funds are not used for the
purposes intended. Improving dissemination of information is a high priority for the Bank Group.
Moreover, civil society could play an increasing role in, for example, monitoring expected physical
outputs of project implementation particularly at the provincial level.
16.
Inadequate budgeting and monitoringframework within the government. At present a significant
proportion of aid-financed expenditures are not included in the government's official budget35
Counterpart funding to IDA projects is therefore dependent on the monthly cash allocation procedure
carried out by MEF. There is anecdotal evidence which suggest that these allocations are not always made
on a transparent basis. The main implication of this for the portfolio is that the receipt of counterpart
contributions to IDA projects cannot be forecast with certainty, leading to delays in project
implementation.
17.
Insufficient coordination between MEF and line ministries that implement projects. A
Memorandum of Understanding is required to be signed between the line ministry and MEF after a Credit
has been signed. This MOU lays out the obligations and responsibilities of both parties throughout the
duration of the project. Two of the stated3 6 objectives for having the MOU were to ensure 'transparency
35IDA Cambodia Public Expenditure Review, Report No. 18791-KH, January 1999
36

Under 'General Principles' of the standard Memorandum of Understandingpublished by MEF.

- 103 in the use of Credit proceeds' and to achieve the 'rapid implementation' of projects. With the passage of
time however, the existence of the MOU has given rise to the very things it sought to avoid. As an
example, one of the main areas of involvement by MEF is in procurement. Under the MOU, MEF staff
are variously required to review the bidding documents; attend bid openings; or be present at bid
evaluation committee meetings. In addition, the Minister of Finance (or his designate) must sign a no
objection letter in respect of all contracts for the purchase of goods and consultants services over
$100,000 and for contracts in excess of $150,000 for civil works. The review procedures have the effect
of introducing delays into project implementation and have given rise to repeated allegations of a lack of
transparency in the award of contracts as MEF, and not the line ministry, is perceived to be the party
really responsible for procurement and contracting.
18.
Several actions can be taken by the government with the support of IDA to lessen the impact of
these problems on the portfolio:
*

*

*
*
*

IDA in conjunction with the govemment will explore ways in which a training program for finance
stream civil servants can be developed. For example, The World Bank Institute (WBI) and MEF's
Economics and Finance Institute (EFI), currently supported by the IDA Technical Assistance Credit,
could develop a course on basic project accounting in donor assisted projects to be attended by
suitably identified candidates from core line ministries. These individuals would then be available to
staff new donor-assisted projects, with any delays in taking up appointment being limited to any
necessary inter ministerial reassignment required. In addition, IDA will seek to work with the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) and the government to explore ways in which the ADB's Project
Accounting System can be adapted for use on IDA-financed projects to streamline the of donor
requirements in this area, possibly financed through a grant. In the immediate future IDA will employ
the services of local accounting firms, to carry out Financial Management and Statements of
Expenditures reviews in tandem with IDA supervision missions. In the longer term, as part of its
intention to expand the World Bank Office in Phnom Penh, IDA will employ additional staff who
have detailed knowledge of IDA's disbursement and financial management requirements. These staff
will then be able to provide assistance to projects in the critical start up phase and will be available to
join IDA supervisionmissions.
IDA will review the existing portfolio to ensure that in all cases, Credit proceeds are available to meet
the cost of the annual audit. Following this, in conjunction with MEF, IDA will develop a
methodology for evaluating potential audit firms on a transparent and regular basis. Only firms
meeting the evaluation criteria will then be eligible to undertake audits under IDA financed Credits.
As discussed during CAS consultations in October 1999, IDA will make information about its
lending activities, including projects under preparation more widely available to civil society as a
whole.
In addition to this, as new Credits are negotiated, IDA will be encouraging the government to
covenant, via the Credit Agreements, to specified annual advance deposits of counterpart funds into
designated project bank accounts.
IDA will encourage the govemment to review the current MOU with a view to ensuring that this
continues to fulfil its stated objectives. In particular, IDA will work with MEF to ensure more
responsibility can be devolved to the line ministries with MEF playing an oversight role on a more
random basis; MEF's role in the procurement process could be adjusted in line with IDA's prior
review arrangements (as stated in the Development Credit Agreement); and for example "no
objections" could be required from the Minister of Finance only in respect of items procured under
International Competitive Bidding (ICB) arrangements.

- 104ANNEXG-1. IN-COUNTRYCAS CONSULTATIONS,
OCTOBER199937

1.
*
•
•
*
*
*
*
*

CAS discussions were held with the following stakeholders:
The Cabinet (Interministerial Committee)
Representatives of the National Assembly
Representatives of the Senate
Members of the Sam Rainsy (opposition)party
The international donor community
NGO representatives in Battambang
NGO representatives in Phnom Penh
Private businesses and business organizations in Phnom Penh

In addition, H.E. Prime Minister Samdech Hun Sen and H.R.H. Prince Ranariddh, President of the
National Assembly, were briefed on the strategy document and on the ongoing discussions.
2.
All meeting preparation, including document distribution, was facilitated through the office of the
World Bank in Phnom Penh. The government took the lead in organizing meetings of the interministerial
committee (Cabinet) and with representatives from the National Assembly and Senate. The World Bank
office directly organized discussions with donors: all major organizations, including those based in
Bangkok, were represented, or subsequently consulted during the quarterly stocktaking meeting of
government and donors on October 27, 1999. The private sector consultation was organized in close
collaboration with IFC and the Phnom Penh office of the Mekong Project Development Facility (MPDF).
Over 75 people attended the private sector seminar, primarily representatives from the garment sector,
small and medium-sized enterprises, the Phnom Penh Chamber of Commerce, the Cambodian Business
Women's Association, and the International Business Club. No government officials were present at this
seminar.
3.
With regard to civil society consultations, the Cooperation Committee for Cambodia (CCC), NGO
Forum on Cambodia and MEDICAM, three major networks active in development work, agreed to
facilitate the process. It was agreed to hold two workshops, one in Phnom Penh and the other in a
provincial town, to ensure wider geographic coverage and provide opportunity for rural-based NGOs to
participate in the process. The NGOs also independently organized a series of pre-consultation planning
meetings in Phnom Penh and Battambang. At these meetings, NGO representatives, reviewed the history
of the Bank Group's work in Cambodia and in other parts of the region, and the lessons learned which
would be important in informing the new CAS. The issues that emerged from these meetings were
organized around inter-clusters (key issues) that were subsequently incorporated into the agenda of the
workshops. Participatory methodologies were adopted. The pre-consultation meetings also resulted in the
selection of NGO representatives to present overview papers on key topics during the structured part of
the workshops. Further, the meetings helped in developing the less structured part of the agenda of the
workshops - consisting of open question and answer sessions involving dialogue between Bank staff and
NGO participants - by providing information to participants, which enabled them to prepare more probing
and challenging questions on the transformation process that Cambodian society is undergoing.
Underscoring the progress that Cambodia has made in the last few years, it was significant that the NGO
organizers, using their own resources, were able to successfully organize the pre-consultation meetings.
It was also significant that the participants at the meetings coming from many diverse organizations were
able to reach consensus on the major issues to be raised during the consultation workshops.
4.
Discussions with Stakeholders
* The main questions posed by the World Bank Group team were: (i) Does the CAS discussion
document correctly identify Cambodia's development challenges, priorities and opportunities?
37

Detailed commentson the text, including clarification of data, are not covered in this summary, but reflected in the document itself.

- 105

-

Accordingly, what should be the main focus of the CAS; (ii) Is the proposed partnership approach
feasible (including Sector-Wide Approaches, identification and development of strategic
partnerships) and what are the benefits and risks; (iii) Can we agree on development outcomes and
how to monitor them? What role could stakeholders play in this monitoring? How could information
about the Bank Group's activities be disseminated more effectively?
Principal questions raised by stakeholdersregarding the Bank Group's strategy and activities were: (i)
How are IDA loans approved; (ii) How can different stakeholders participate more effectively in the
formulation and implementation of Bank Group and other donor strategies; (iii) Will Cambodia be
able to repay its loans; and (iv) How does IDA monitor whether the loans are reaching the right
people.
Key issues raised in the discussions:
The Cabinet (Interministerial Committee), October 20, 1999
* Development Priorities. Cambodia needs to build an environment more conducive to social
development, building on existing agendas agreed at international conventions (e.g. Copenhagen,
Beijing). Investing in and committing to building civil society is a long-term process. The
government has to work hard to promote civil society since this will be the foundation for sustainable
growth. There is a clear need for long-term capacity-building (creating a cadre of managers and welltrained policy makers). Donors and government should consider a more cross-sectoral approach to
development; inter-ministerial communication should be improved. Rural infrastructure development
is a priority. Children need better access to healthcare. Improving gender equality and access to
education in particular is desirable, but gender stereotypes are deep. Strengthening education is
essential, as Cambodia lost an entire generation of educated people in the 1970s. IDA should strongly
consider supporting tertiary educationto build leadership.
* SWAPs. The health SWAP should build on the basis of the program that the Ministry of Health has
initiated, with support from WHO. A transport SWAP would be very desirable. This will also help
poverty alleviation and social sector development, and improve access to education and health
services. There are other clear benefits in terms of reduced transport/freight costs, increased producer
prices, and employment-generation in road construction. Local construction industries should be
supported also to help with maintenance. More funds should be allocated to road maintenance also.
Work on governance should focus strongly on the rule of law. Legal and judicial reform are essential
for good governance. Enforcement and application of laws is weak. Current priorities in legal reform
are preparation of the National Security Law, and the Commune Elections Law. Cambodia needs to
create a pool of legal expertise/advisors at the four institutions concerned with legal reform: National
Assembly, Council of Ministers, Ministry of Interior and Ministry of Justice.
* Partnerships. The government owns the reform agenda. Donors must recognize and acknowledge
this. Accordingly, the govemment wants real ownership of projects and to work with donors in a true
spirit of partnership. Donors need to be more disciplined about coordinating amongst themselves;
providing information to the government about their activities. Many donors bypass the budget, so it
is very difficult to keep track of their programs and projects.
* Monitoring and evaluation. The global development indicators [OECD] are not realistic in the
Cambodian context. Since the poor have more children, having poverty by 2015 would not be
feasible. How can the World Bank really help to reduce infant mortality by 2/3 and maternal mortality
by Y4 [OECD global goals] given the poor condition of healthcare services? More appropriate goals
and targets should be discussed.
* Participation. The implicit support for greater participation of women and children in development,
particularly at the grass roots level, is welcomed.
* Representativesof the National Assembly and the Senate, October 26, 1999
* Bank Groupactivities. The National Assembly and the Senate should become more actively involved
in dialogue with the Bank Group. All loans must be approved by the National Assembly, according to
Article 90 of the constitution. IDA should be more transparent about its own activities. IDA should
also monitor the implementation of its projects carefully, and the utilization of funds to ensure there is

- 106 no corruption. Salaries paid to international experts should be reviewed carefully as they are often too
high.
• Development priorities. The CAS is on the right track. The presentation [on the CAS] reflects the
realities of Cambodia. Human resources development should be linked to public administration
reform. The Bank should be involved extensively in the social sectors. Investing in education is an
important way of reducing poverty. IDA should be involved in provision of textbooks and materials,
and in upgrading professional skills of teachers. Road upgrading is also a high priority. IDA should
support agricultural development. IDA should target the poorest provinces, particularly in the
northeast. In general, the poor should be much better targeted.
* Aid Utilization has to be more effective. Why did GDP fall to 1 percent in 1997 and in 1998 even
though Cambodia received large amounts of foreign aid during that period?
* Lending scenarios. It is not fair to penalize poor people [by reducing lending] if the govemment's
performance on policy reforms is inadequate.
* Participation. National Assembly members should be invited to discussions of government and
donors on demobilization.
Members of the Sam Rainsy (opposition) Party, October 19, 1999
* Bank Group Activities. The government should not enter into loan agreements with intemational
organizations without consulting the National Assembly, as required by the constitution. IDA should
ensure that this due process has been followed. IDA should also inform the National Assembly
regularly about its assistance program, including details of loan amounts. IDA should evaluate its
projects and disseminate information accordingly. The Bank Group should consult the opposition
regularly.
* Cambodia's Development Priorities are: strengthening govemance and tackling corruption, and
supporting rural development. Improved road access is essential, particularly for stimulating
private/foreign investment. Civil service reform is a high priority. Training of public officials should
not be carried out in isolation from this.
* There has to be greater transparency in all areas: award of logging contracts, military reform,
privatization of state-owned enterprises, tax revenue collections, public expenditure. An independent
audit board should be established. Laws need to be drafted in a transparent manner.
* ParticipationNational Assembly members should be invited to participated in quarterly stocktaking
meetings of government, donors and NGOs.
The international donor community, October 22, 1999 +
* CAS analysis. This should include more coverage of governance issues, and the proposed
administrative decentralization. Existing models of decentralized development (e.g. the
CARERE/Seila program) should be acknowledged. Donors have to think how assistance programs
can overcome capacity constraints at the provincial level.
* Developmentpriorities andfocus of the CAS. It is very difficult to rank these, given Cambodia's large
development needs. However, the priorities should be infrastructure, education, health, governance,
legal and judicial reform, and land management. Land titling is a critical issue. IDA should support
capacity-building in public expenditure management, in collaboration with other donors. Can IDA do
more to support the agriculture sector? A cross-sectoral approach, focusing on poverty is key.
* Sector-Wide Approaches. Donors are willing to participate in SWAPs, and the suggestion to begin
with SWAPs in health, transport (roads) and govemance is appropriate. The health sector is already
taking the lead in reforms. IDA should reinforce what is already being done and build on the work of
existing in-country partnerships between donors and govemment. Also, the health SWAP should
proceed step by step, perhaps beginning in the provinces. Maintenance is a key issue for the road
SWAP; road safety issues should also be addressed. The governance SWAP should be better defined
or perhaps narrowed down. How would it address problems of salaries, corruption? Donors should
also consider whether to participate in a more comprehensive approach/strategic plan as a basis for
identifying priorities. SWAPs may be too piecemeal, but the govemment does not have the capacity
to implement a comprehensive development framework (CDF) yet. SWAPs can be risky. How much

- 107 work will the SWAPs entail, and who would take the lead from the donor side in each thematic area?
Expectations have to be moderated to ensure that the prerequisites are in place. The govemment
needs minimum capacity to implement SWAPS.
* Partnerships. A more collaborative approach is welcomed, and partnerships are a much better way of
doing business. Better cooperation between donors is essential because of the risk of overlap.
govermnent ownership of the process is essential. Donors should give the govemment more
opportunity to make its own decisions. On a practical matter, the proliferation of project management
units, and existence of different procurement and disbursement procedures is very problematic. These
issues will have to be carefully thought through. Coordination with ADB needs to improve. A
specific area for better coordination is in statistics and national accounts.
* Monitoring and Evaluation. The CAS needs to have a stronger emphasis on monitoring and
evaluation. Some indicators have already been developed by government in the health sector, for
example.
* World Bank activities. IDA should strengthen its presence in Cambodia.
Private businesses and business organizations in Phnom Penh, October 22, 1999
* Following presentations by the Bank Group (IDA, IFC, including the Mekong Project Development
Facility office in a plenary session, the seminar was organized around discussion groups. The
participants split into two groups that were called upon to share their thoughts on: (a) proposed main
thrusts of the CAS, rural infrastructure development (roads), health and good govemance and the how
these issues relate to private sector development; and (b) the overall private sector environment and
areas in which the Bank Group's intervention could improve the business climate. The discussion
focused mostly on the impediments to private sector development and how the Bank Group could act
as a facilitator or broker between the govemment and the private sector to create an enabling private
sector environment. The main messages emerging from the discussions, in order of priority, were as
follows:
Group 1. (Mix of Regional and Domestic Entrepreneurs)
- The lack of security, especially physical security was identified as the primary concem among the
business community. Many indicated having had problems with kidnappers either directly or
indirectly. With limited security already in Phnom Penh most 'businesses would not entertain the
prospects of doing business in the rural areas. The more important private sector agents all indicated
they had a minimum of four bodyguards.
• The level of taxes appeared to be the second most important complaint of the business community,
especially those exporting more than half of their production. The recent increase in the VAT tax
from 4 percent to 10 percent and the introduction of a 1 percent minimum tumover tax was perceived
as being an important deterrent to investors. The need for the government to broaden the tax base was
expressed. Some 5 percent of the businesses mostly foreign paid over 85 percent of all the VAT taxes.
The contributing capacity of the legal businesses is being overly stretched. Tax evasion by the local
businesses is very high, this is accompanied with a lot of smuggling activity.
* There was quasi unanimous agreement, within the business community on the existence of a weak
legal system, evidenced by the lack of the rule of law. Poor enforcement of the law and poor
harmonization of existing laws fostered and encouraged poor governance. The discretionary nature of
the courts in the application of the law emerged as an important drawback for the business
community.
* There was general agreement that focusing on rural infrastructure was important in order to increase
access of the rural population to markets and provide incentive for businesses to invest in the rural
areas, especially in agriculture, this enthusiasm was severely tampered by the security concems of the
business community.
* The Bank Group's proposition to focus on good govemance as a major component of the CAS was
strongly endorsed, in particular, the need to reform the public sector and provide the right incentives
for civil servants. Low salary ievels was perceived as the main cause of corruption in the public
sector. The need to educate the public sector on the importance of the private sector to the overall

- 108 -

*

*

*
*

*

contribution to growth in Cambodia was also expressed. Several entrepreneurs expressed satisfaction
over the fact that the issue of corruption was overtly being discussed by the Bank Group, saying it
was as an important first step.
Looking into the future, the business community agreed that agro-industry development was the
primary area in which Cambodia could develop. With 90 percent of the Cambodian population living
in rural areas and 80 percent engaged in agricultural activity, developing this sector would, it was
agreed lead to a significant reduction in the poverty levels.
However the private sector expressed the need to get some clear signals from the government on what
measures it was willing to take to encourage and develop local agricultural markets. The need for a
clear government industrial development strategy was expressed. Developing the tourism industry
was also mentioned as a potential source of growth for the economy.
Lack of adequate information on industrial trends, prices, enterprise data such as a comprehensive
business directory, market survey data made enterprise creation and development more difficult.
Directly linked to the issue of agro-industrial development was the issue of land rights and the need
for clear Property Rights Laws and land titling. Foreign investors especially expressed the need to
have some clear indication on which institutions were responsible for awarding land titles. The need
for increase transparency in the public institutions and for clear definitions of roles and
responsibilities was raised.
Other issues raised during the consultations were; the need to create a more improved market
information system, provide business development services, improve partnerships and cooperation
between the government and the private sector, improve the access to finance for small start up
businesses, and improve the quality of education.

Group II (Mix of Domestic and Western Entrepreneurs)
The Key messages from Group II were:

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Too many surprises in the legal and policy environment jeopardize business strategies. There needs to
be more consultation between the government and private sector on laws and regulations that impact
on the operations of private businesses.
The Bank Group should support the establishment of business associations especially for small and
micro-enterprise dominated sectors. Strong business associations would make partnerships between
the private sector, donors and the govermnent more effective.
The need to target more resources to support women entrepreneurs was raised.
Lack of skilled workers emerged as a constraint for some businesses.
Corruption imposes a major burden especially in dealings with the customs and tax administration.
The problem is worsening and demand for fees have increased.
Different institutions interpret laws and regulations differently. There is too much discretion. Has to
be a level playing field. Institutional roles and responsibilities need to be clarified.
There needs to be much better information dissemination about laws and regulations.
Entrepreneurs suggested the govemment consider the possibility of privatizing some govemment
services such as land registration.
Increased smuggling is negatively affecting the development of local projects.

5.
In conclusion the private sector expressed an interest in building on the partnerships established
during the consultative process to continue participating in the discussions with the Bank on the
Cambodian development agenda.
6.
During the mission to Cambodia the private sector team also visited and had very productive
meetings with private and public sector officials including two factories, a garment factory and a
distillery, National Bank of Cambodia,.the Cambodian Development Corporation and the Secretary of
State for Commerce and Industry.

- 109

-

NGO Representatives:General Comments
* Bank Group Activities. More information should be disseminated and networks strengthened so as to
contribute to effective IDA projects and activities. The general population, especially the poorer
communities - through NGOs and other civil society networks - needed to be made more aware of
the Bank Group's activities, and should also be encouraged to have their concerns and interests
reflected in proposed projects. An annual dialogue, such as the present one, was the minimum
interaction required to maintain the flow of information and to provide momentum to the consultation
and participatory process between the Bank Group and major stakeholders in the country.
a
Development and assistance priorities. (a) rural development (including land and natural resources);
(b) rehabilitation of physical and social infrastructure; (c) education and health sectors and (d)
improving govemance. While a range of support to the government should be provided, the
strengthening of local capacity and building of efficient management of projects is a necessary
component.
* Capacity-building Given the formidable range of unmet development needs in the country, it was felt
that capacity building and the provision of technical assistance to upgrade counterpart skills in all
areas was a priority. The use of local expertise and local staff was still lagging in many projects, even
when skills were available, and partnership should be regarded as in intermediary step in building
local and national self-reliance.
* Demobilization. IDA should influence the government to promote demilitarization policies, so that
the downsizing of the armed forces and police personnel does not happen in a vacuum. Various
NGOs recommended that community-based programs for demobilizing the soldiers would be more
beneficial than individually addressed cash transfer efforts.
* Partnerships. The Bank Group should promote regular dialogue with the government and civil
society on key issues through the dissemination of research findings and through other forms of
communication. This is important not only to provide information but also to build trust (social
capital) between the Bank Group and various stakeholders and ensure a more integrated country
assistance program which has greater government and local ownership. Through the dialogue, the
Bank Group would be placed in a better position to promote relationships and encourage networking
in the key development areas that the strategy was intending to focus on. The Bank Group was also
asked to promote and coordinate various partnerships, especially among donors, to increase the
effectiveness of programs and also to utilize fully the complementarities and comparative advantage
of the various development partners.
* Sector-wide approaches. On the positive side, SWAPs would strengthen coordination, reduce
duplication of efforts and help in utilizing limited resources more effectively. Disadvantages include
the narrowing of vision of the broader picture and the possible excessive focusing on physical outputs
rather than taking an holistic approach to development. SWAPs would require careful management
and leadership to be effective.
* Monitoring and evaluation. IDA's approach in the past (e.g., short-term supervisory missions) was
too limited and more focused attention and expansion of monitoring is important. While the
establishment of a full-fledged World Bank country office would partially address the problem,
improvements to the project-specific monitoring tools and systems and the development of relevant
measurable indicators to track progress were also required. In improving management and
monitoring systems, higher standards of accountability and transparency were vital. Adequate
funding of maintenance systems and improvement of technical standards were also necessary.
NGO representatives in Battambang (October 23, 1999)
* Development priorities. Governance (including respect for rule of law, human rights), rehabilitation
of physical infrastructure (particularly roads and health services) effective management of land and
security of tenure, and demobilization are key challenges confronted by the government, donors and
civil society. IDA programs should take into account gender issues account across the board; IDA
should strongly support education of rural women. Development must be sustainable. IDA should
focus more on rural areas.

- 110-

*

Aid dependency. The government should be encouraged to mobilize domestic resources rather than
continue to depend on external assistance.
* Partnerships. The key to sustainability is having a shared and committed vision. Without objectives
and goals clearly communicated to civil society, the government and donors will not be successful in
development efforts. With an open learning environment and with resources for support,
sustainability can be enhanced. The development of regular dialogue between the Bank Group and
NGOs is an important step in supporting this open learning environment. The relationship between
NGOs and both local and national government should be strengthened.
[Several detailed recommendations were also made in group discussions].
NGO representatives in Phnom Penh (October 25,1999)
* Bank Group activities. Projects must be equitable, and reach poor and marginalized communities.
Loans should respond to priority needs, to the needs of the majority of Cambodians, and should be
used in a proper and effective manner.
* Priorities: Critical building blocks in the country's development process are: strengthening
governance and fighting corruption; developing the rule of law; taking into account gender issues;
and facilitating equitable and transparent access to land.
* Participation. NGOs could play an effective role in planning and monitoring donor program
implementation,and in public education on good governance issues.
Follow-Up

7.
Consultations raised a high degree of expectations. The CAS acknowledges the significant and
substantive contributions made. As a first step, the recommendations of stakeholders will be published in
the CAS which will be translated into Khmer and disseminated in Cambodia and also available
internationally via the Bank's Website. Second, the Bank Group will make every effort to improve
dissemination about its activities, beginning with a brochure, but also through a quarterly bulletin and via
the Internet Third, the recommendations in the discussions have, to the extent feasible, been incorporated
into the revised CAS itself. Finally, the Bank Group envisages an annual program of consultations to
monitor progress.

- ill

-

ANNEX G-2 CAMBODIACLIENT FEEDBACKSURVEY: EXECUTIVESUMMARY

Methodology
1.
Client surveys were distributed to 57 stakeholders in Cambodia in August, 1999. 45 respondents
participated by filling out paper surveys in Khmer. Respondents were asked to rate the Bank Group on
levels of importance (1-5 scale, I being very unimportant, 5 being very important) and level of Bank
Group effectiveness (1-5 scale, 1 being very ineffective, 5 being very effective). Approximately 60
percent of respondents came from government and public enterprise. The remaining respondents were
primarily from NGOs, the donor community, and the private sector.3 9
Main Results: Highlights
2.
Research findings show that stakeholdersin Cambodia consider the following areas of the Bank
Group's work most important (in decreasing order of importance):
*
*
*
*
*
=
*

Taking account of country's realities (in project design)
Bank officials' technical competence
Establishing conditions for long term sustainability(in project design)
Bank's contribution to helping bring about economic growth
Strengtheningknowledge and skill of individuals
Bank's officials reliability in delivering on commitments
Helping to assure that project benefits justify cost to country (during project design)

3.
Research indicates that of those seven top priorities listed above, the Bank Group rated higher
than average on all in terms of effectiveness. However, as the chart below shows, there is still a fairly
wide gap between levels of importance and levels of effectiveness in certain areas, as perceived by
stakeholders in Cambodia. (Question numbers in brackets)
Questions
Project design: work of World Bank (WB) in taking account of

Importance
Mean
4.71

Effectiveness
Mean
3.76

4.69
4.68

4.16
3.75

4.64
4.63
4.62
4.61

3.47
3.19
4.02
4.07

country realities (32)

WTBofficials' technical competence (17)
Project Design: Establishing conditions for long term
sustainability (38)
WB contribution to helping bring about economic growth (2)
Strengtheningknowledge and skills of individuals (55)
WB officials' reliability in delivering on commitments (19)
Project design: helping assure that project benefitsjustify cost
to country (35)

Research indicates that respondents consider nearly everything the Bank does important. Only one issue
in the entire survey scored below a 4.0 on level of importance:
*

Helping to strengthen the private sector (3.51 mean)

39Because of the way the questionnaire was printed, there were no boxes to fill in for questions A3 (WB's contribution in helping strengthen and

maintain sound macroeconomic and trade policies), A8 (supporting programs that include all social groups in development), and A14 (helping to
strengthen the frameworkfor a market economy). As a result, these questions received minimal participation. The results from these questions
were not included in report.

-

112-

In addition, in terms of effectiveness, stakeholdersin Cambodia rate the Bank Group average or
below average on only two areas of work:
* Building capacity at community level (2.85 mean)
* Strengtheninglocal training and research organizations (3.04)
The Bank's level of effectiveness is perceived as the weakest in the following areas (beginning with
the lowest level of effectiveness):
* Building capacity at the community level (2.85)
* Strengtheninglocal training and research organizations (3.04)
* Helping to strengthenprivate sector (3.12)
* Strengtheningknowledge and skills/ Bank Group support in terms of reflection of different
viewpoints across the population (3.19)
* Helping to strengthen/maintainsound macro and trade policies (3.26)
It is worth looking at how the areas in which the Bank Group is perceived to be least effective
compare to the perceived levels of importance.
Questions
Building capacity at community level (57)
Strengtheninglocal training and research organizations (56)
Helping to strengthen private sector (6)
WB support: Reflection of different viewpoints across population
(29)
Strengtheningknowledge and skills (55)
Helping to ensure that benefits of developmentjustify costs (12)
Helping to strengthen/maintain sound macro and trade policies
(36)

Effectiveness Importance
Mean
Mean
2.85
4.46
3.04
4.59
3.12
3.5
3.19
4.04
3.19
3.26
3.26

4.6
4.2
4.1

Previous Performance of the Country Office
4.
As with other areas of Bank work, respondents in Cambodia have better than average views of
the work of the Bank's Office there. One impressive finding is that there is a very small gap between how
important respondents regard 'the office's ability to deal with matters locally, without having to refer to
headquarters' (mean score 4.12) and how effective the Bank Group is at this work (mean score 4.05).
However, the results indicate that the Bank Group has not done as well as the respondents would like it to
at communicatingwith local constituencies.
For example:
Questions
'The work of the Bank's Office in terms of...'
Improving understanding of the Bank's role and program of

Importance
mean
4.5

assistance to your country (F2)

Explaining Bank policies and procedures (F3)
Communicating with diverse groups in the country affected by
the Bank program (F4)

Effectiveness
mean
3.32
I

4.3
4.37

3.12
3.4
l

- 113 Donor Coordination
5.
Respondents reported that the Bank Group is most effective, in general, at its role in donor
coordination. Research indicates that stakeholders believe that donor coordination is important and that
the Bank Group is performing well above average on this front. This is particularly encouraging at a time
when the Bank Group is trying hard to strengthenpartnerships and improve outreach on the ground.
For example:
Questions

Importance
mean

Effectiveness
mean

'Contribution of the World Bank in...'
Helping attract project co-financing from other donors (G1)
Helping to harmonize policies and procedures of donors
collaborating on programs of support (G2)
Helping reduce duplication of donor efforts (G3)
Helping ensure that donors deliver on their CG commitments
(G6)__

_

_

4.47
4.45

3.94
3.94

4.47
4.71

4.02
4.17

_

_

_

_

_

_

Implications
6.
At this stage the survey indicates a generally positive view of the Bank Group's work. The Bank
Group's work is valued by stakeholders and perceived as being done fairly effectively. In many other
countries surveyed in FY99 the Bank Group does not rate nearly as well in terms of effectiveness.
7.
It is interesting to note that out of the top seven priorities of stakeholders, three are related to
project design (work of the Bank Group in taking account of country realities; establishing conditions for
long term sustainability; and helping assure that project benefits justify cost to country). These findings
indicate that stakeholders care deeply about the long term usefulness of BankGroup strategy and projects,
and to a certain degree, project design is a gauge by which they measure sustainability.
8.
It may be of value to begin to help the clients identify priorities in consultation with the Bank
because at this point they appear to view nearly everything as 'important.' This effort may help manage
future expectations. In addition, it may be of value to conduct some follow-up qualitative interviews or
informal discussions with stakeholders to discuss the survey's findings. This would help determine which
areas truly require greater focus and which areas require greater communication. In what appears to be a
positive environment, the survey provides an excellent opportunity to engage in follow-up dialogue with
these important target audiences.

- 114Graphical Summary
Clients: Current positions of the respondents
(number of respondents per category is in brackets; total number of respondents-43)

Other(9)

Seniorofficialin

21°

nat'lgovt.(13)
30%

Academ'cor
researcher(1)
2%
Org.
NDn-govt
official(5)
12%

Private

Managerinnat'l

enterprisePublicenterprise
manager(2) rranager(4)
5%
9%

Policyof
technicaladvisor
in nat'lgovt.(4)

1o2
12%

Number of years of involvement with the Bank Group
(Total number of respondents=43)

Lessthan
oneyear
14%

Morethan
threeyears
55%

Oneto
threeyears
31%

- 115Stakeholders'

Views:

Most Important Areas of Bank Group Activity
(question numbers are in brackets)

Scale: l=very unimportant; 2=fairly unimportant; 3=average; 4=fairly important; 5=very important

Project design: taking account of country realities
(32)

1

,4.

Technical competence (17)

4.69

.

Project design: establishing the conditions for
long-term sustainability (38)

-

4.68

Helping to bring about economic growth (2)

4, 1

Strengthening knowledge and skills of individuals

44

Reliabilityin delivering on commitments (19)
Project design: helping assure that project benefits
justifythe cost to the country (35)

1111111
46
_

1

2

3

4

5

Stakeholders' Views
Least Important Areas of Bank Group Activity
(question numbers are in brackets)
Scale: I=very unimportant, 2=fairly unimportant; 3=average; 4=fairly important; 5=very important

He Iping to strengthen

Reflection

the private

of different viewpoints
population (29)

sector (6)

=

3

5

across the

4 04

~~~~~~~~~~~.0
7

__4
Reflecting

the diversity

of views
(4 7)

in your country
1

__4~~~~~~~~~~~
Helping to improve

governance

t2

4 14

(4
1

2

3

4

5

- 116Stakeholders' Views
Most Effective Areas of Bank Group Activity
(question numbers are in brackets)
Scale: I=very ineffective; 2=fairly ineffective; 3=average; 4=fairly effective; 5=very effective

Technicalcompetence (17)
funds in a timely
Project implementationAdisbursing
manner (39)

best practices in their
Knowledgeabout international

_

,,

field (24)

Projectimplementation:
responding to submissions and
_

requests (43)

<O

Projectdesign: helpingassure that project benefits

, m

M

justify the costs to the country (35)

f&

Consistency of messages (21)

- lj

.iW
WMQ

Accuracyin concentratingon yourcountry'skey
developmentpriorities(27)

Ni

_5
i

Reliabilityin deliveringon commitments (19)

2

1

5

4

3

Stakeholders' Views:
Least Effective Areas of Bank Group Activity
(question numbers are in brackets)
Scale: I=very ineffective; 2=fairly ineffective; 3=average; 4=fairly effective; 5=very effective

Buildingca pacityat the community level (57)
Strengthening local training and research
organizations (56)
Helping to strengthen the private sector (6)

4i

Strengthening knowledge and skills of individuals
(55)
Reflection of different viewpoints across the
population (29)
Helping to ensure that the benefits of
development justify the costs (12)
Helping to strengthen and maintain sound

macroeconomic and trade policies (3)
1

2

3

4

5

- 117Clients' perceptions of the importance of different Bank Group areas of activity
and the Bank's effectiveness in addressing those
(These are most important areas of activity identified by stakeholders)
Importance
mean

Effectiveness
mean

Project design: taking account of country realities (32)

4.71

3.76

Project design: establishing the conditions for longterm sustainability (38)
Technical competence (17)

4.68

3.70

4.69

4.16

Helping to bring about economic growth (2)

4.64

3.47

Strengtheningknowledge and skills of individuals (55)

4.63

3.19

Reliability in delivering on commitments(19)

4.62

4.02

Project design: helping assure that project benefits
justify the costs to the country (35)

4.61

4.07

Questions

Clients' perceptions of the importance of different Bank Group areas of activity
and the Bank's effectiveness in addressing those
(These are least effective areas of activity identified by stakeholders)
Questions

Importance
mean
2.85

Effectiveness
mean
4.46

Strengthening local training and research organizations (56)

3.04

4.59

Helping to strengthen the private sector (6)

3.12

3.50

Reflection of different viewpoints across the population (29)

3.19

4.04

Strengtheningknowledge and skills if individuals (55)

3.19

4.60

Helping to strengthen and maintain sound macroeconomic
and trade policies (3)
Helping to ensure that the benefits of developmentjustify
the costs (12)

3.26

4.10

3.26

4.20

Building capacity at the community level (57)

IBRD28781
'w

102'

A 100

1

'N

nom Thb

TNAKIRi

g

K~~~~~~~~Prong
~~~~~~

OMPON

KOf;K

J

h~~~~~~~n7

f

X

?

<

~

~
SihanoukviII

,J

-A

& N"

W
REA
~~~SIEM

\

.

t

A' E)

Kampot

/_ c

LAOPEOPL'S
%
eEMOCRATICR UBLIC

t

THAILAND

0,

-

-S

N N

HM'

ON
h enmonoromlETNA

;SO

Ko

-

<

Kon-, pongIDHMYN

a

25

75

loa -

7hismapwosprepon.^dbyth~~~~ekopMLSI

GufAILOAD

Thoifan

BONARE
POINC- .n'ss

-

M

>

8/

<

O

OI othernratin shown
CM
and

~ ~~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~5519

Se

C

J

'

3JK

0CHanN

J
fiiis

-121~

Si

X

sof

VI

12'TIlaiF

N2n1ixbCiu

nkile!, .1.WorldBanli.

IDan

impl; on th ota
mo do MYAot
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ti

- ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~a
102

o
endorsement
anyINC

104

.

~~

~

~

~

.2

r-~

0E

r.IH

anRertr;
lea sttn oEM
theD

of such:a

~ ~ ~

dz9ABDI

'cetac

5519

SI

win

4csbn

sChina

