Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 20301 - BIH
Public Disclosure Authorized

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

April 25, 2000

Southeast Europe Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performanceof their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

CURRENCYEQUIVALENTS
(as of March 31, 2000)
Unit of currency: Konvertible Marka (KM), equivalent to 1:1 to Deutsche Mark
I KM=US$0.50
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONSAND ACRONYMS
BH
BAC
CAS
COM
EBRD
EDS
EIB
EBPAC
EU
FRY
PYROM
GDP
IDA
IFC
IMF
I-PRSP
KM
LSMS
MFTER
MIGA
MTEF
PFSAC
PRGF
PRRP
PRSP
SAA
SBA
SFRY
SP

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Business Environment Adjustment Credit
Country Assistance Strategy
Council of Ministers
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Economic Development Strategy
European Investment Bank
Enterprise and Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit
European Union
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Gross Domestic Product
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Konvertible Marka
Living Standards Measurement Survey
Ministry for Foreign Trade and Economic Relations
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Public Finance Structural Adjustment Credit
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Stabilization and Association Agreement
Stand-by Arrangement
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Stability Pact
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31

Vice President: Johannes F. Linn
Country Director: Christiaan J. Poortman
Task Team Leaders: Mary Sheehan and Simon Gray

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSSISTANCE STRATEGY
FYOO-02

Table of Contents
ExecutiveSummary

........................................................................................................

I. Introduction .
II. Recent Developments.
A. Political Context.

B. EconomicPerformance

2

C. Social Context
D. The External Environment

3
5

III. Bosnia and Herzegovina's DevelopmentChallenges and Priorities
A. Development Challenges
B. Economic Development Priorities

.

.

6

.6
.6

StrengtheningInstitutions and Governance
Fostering Private Sector-Led Growth and Employment .
Building Social Sustainability .12
Completing Reconstruction .14
IV. Economic Outlook and External Environment

.8
0

..

15

A. Base Case Economic Scenario .15
B. Low Case Scenario .17
V. The FYOO-02Country Assistance Strategy.

17

A. Formulating the Country Assistance Strategy .17
B. Objectives of the FYOO-02Country Assistance Strategy .20
C. Planned FYOO-02World Bank Group Program .21
21
23

StrengtheningInstitutions and Govemance..
Fostering Private Sector Led Growth and Employment
Building Social Sustainability .25
D. IDA Lending Levels and Triggers .26
VI. Country Program Risks and Monitoring

.29

This documenthas a restricteddistributionand may be used by recipientsonly in the
performanceof theirofficial duties. Its contentsmaynot otherwisebe disclosedwithout
WorldBank authorization.

Tables:
Table 1.
Table 2.
Table 3.
Table 4.
Table 5.

Progress Toward Reform in the Real Sector in the SEE Region
Key Economic Indicators, 1996-2005
Lending Triggers
Lending Program and Major AAA Under the Base and Low Cases
Key Policy Outcomes to be Achieved Under Base and Low Cases

Charts:
Chart 1. BH: Evolution of GDP
Chart 2. SEE Region: GNP Per Capita, 1998
Chart 3. BH: Donor Commitments and Disbursements, 1996-2004
Boxes:
Box I.
Box 2.
Box 3.
Box 4.
Box 5.
Box 6.
Box 7.
Box 8.

The Legacy of War on Everyday Lives
Frameworkfor Economic Development in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2000-2004
Dayton Governance Arrangements
Constraints to Private Investment and Business Development
The CAS Participatory Process: A Bosnian Vision of the Future
Lessons Learned During FY98-99
Working in Partnership Toward Greater Transparency
The Balkan Enterprise Facility: Promoting SMEs in the Region

Annexes:
Bosnia and Herzegovina at a Glance
Annex 1. Achievements of the Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program
Annex 2. Bank Support to Encouraging Participation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Annex 3. Coordination and Partnerships in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Annex B2. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3. Bank Group Program Summary
Annex B4. Summary of Non-Lending Services
Annex B5. Key Social Indicators
Annex B6. Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7. Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8. Status of Bank Group Operations
Annex B9. CAS Program Matrix
Annex BIO. CAS Summary of Development Priorities

ii

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSSISTANCESTRATEGY
FYOO-02
Executive Summary
Bosnia and Herzegovina is now at a crossroads. Over the next two to three years it must begin to
generate a sustainable growth momentum. Postwar growth of the last four years has been strong brought about by a successful reconstruction effort and sound macro performance - but it is not yet
sustainable. And while recovery has brought a generalized increase in incomes, many Bosnians remain
worse off than before the war and unemployment is painfully high. Fragmented postwar governance
continues to make consensus difficult and has been at the root of a slower than hoped for reform effort.
Two external factors will also affect the development outlook in the next two to three years: With
completion of the postwar Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program (1996-1999) at hand, donors
will now begin to phase down their programs of support. This will require fiscal and external adjustment
as well as other less tangible adjustments over this critical two to three year period. Finally, the recentlyannounced Stability Pact for Southeast Europe presents an opportunity for closer integration with
European institutions. Accelerated structural and institutional reforms to bring the country closer to
European standards will be needed to take advantage of this opportunity.
Thus, Bosnia and Herzeogovina faces two specific challenges in the period ahead: First, it must
begin to take ownership of its economic future by assuming increased responsibility for economic
policies and outcomes. This will mean strengthening governance at all levels and reducing dependence
on the international community. Second, it must promote sustainable growth and employment in an
inclusive way that provides increasing incomes and opportunitiesfor all Bosnians. Reforms aimed at
increasing private sector activity, and, in parallel, measures to ensure that growth is inclusive and that
safety nets are in place for those who cannot feel its full benefits are needed.
As a key step in taking increased ownership for economic outcomes, the Bosnian authorities are
now preparing a first Economic Development Strategy (EDS) for the period 2000-2004. The EDS will
be a Bosnian-owned strategy that is intended to replace the donor-led Priority Reconstruction and
Recovery Program as the basis for policy and spending decisions, and serve as a framework to guide
external development assistance. A Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) will build on the EDS
and set out, inter alia, a strategy to ensure growth is sustainable and inclusive, and a plan to overhaul
social protection systems to more effectively meet the needs of the poorest.' In the course of preparing
the CAS, we have discussed with the authorities and other stakeholders the country's development
priorities. There is broad consensus on four main components of the reform agenda the government
needs to tackle over the next several years (set out in greater detail in Section III of the CAS):
Key Medium-Term Challenges
Strengthening governance and public sector management. Strong and accountable institutions and
good governance are pre-conditions to sustained success in other reform areas. There have been
significant achievements over the last CAS period, supported by IDA adjustment lending. But BH's
newly-established institutions, fragmented government structures and competition between BH's three

As a first step in this process, the authorities are currently preparing an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy.

iii

constituent groups mean developing good govemance will be a long-term objective requiring
consistent, well-sequenced efforts. The key medium-term priorities center on enhancing the
transparency of public institutions, and developing and implementing a medium-term fiscal adjustment
strategy in a climate of lower and less concessional donor resources.
Fostering private sector led-growth. Progress on structural reforms aimed at building a marketF
oriented economy has been slower than hoped; privatization in particular has been delayed. Deeper and
more consistent structural reforms are needed for sustainable growth and employment. Growth that
generates substantial employment, particularly in the SME sector, will be a key element of BH's
poverty reduction strategy. The key reform measures needed are a transparent and predictable enabling
environment, accelerated privatization, continued banking sector reform and labor market reforms to
help create productive employment opportunities.
*

Building social sustainability. A growth strategy alone is not sufficient to address the needs of the
poorest. Social sustainability implies broadly increasing incomes, but also improved human and social
conditions, and reduced risk and vulnerability. Targeted programs and policies are required to
complement better governance and sustainable, inclusive growth. Together, these factors can also
generate movement towards political reconciliation. Medium-term priorities include improving poverty
and social sector data and capacities, reforming social protection systems, developing education and
health finance and governance, and spurring greater participation and inclusion in an environment
where the legacy of war includes discrimination among ethnic groups.

*

Completing reconstruction. Finally, needs remain in housing, community services such as water and
solid waste services, and demining. While the reconstruction effort produced remarkable achievements
- e.g., returning most services to their prewar levels in just four years - addressing the remaining
physical impacts of war in selected sectors is likely to take many more years.

The FYOO-02Country Assistance Strategy
The FYOO-02CAS is formed on the basis of consultations with stakeholders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is consistent with, and builds on, the major thrusts of our previous CAS and the lessons
of implementation. Discussions with the many other international partners involved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's development effort on their plans and programs have also contributed to developing an
appropriate role for the Bank Group, based on our comparative advantage. Finally, the CAS also fits
within the broader framework of the Regional strategy paper for Southeast Europe, developed by the
Bank and the European Union in the context of the Stability Pact. The reform agenda set out in this CAS
is one to which all partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina's development effort will contribute. The World
Bank Group's support (Section V), will continue to be selective. We have been asked by the authorities
as well as by other key partners, to continue the policy reform supportive role we played during the last
CAS, and which few other donors are able to assume. In tandem, we intend to disengage from
reconstruction related activities over this CAS period.
The overarching objective of the World Bank Group's partnership with Bosnia and Herzegovina is
to increase economic opportunity and improve the quality of life for all Bosnians. Poverty reduction is
an overarching, cross-cutting theme. In light of Bosnia and Herzegovina's development priorities, and
the role that the World Bank Group can play in addressing these priorities, the strategic objectives of the
FYOO-02CAS period will be:

iv

*

to help strengthen weak andfragmented governance arrangements to build a solid foundation for
broad-based self-sustaining growth and democratic participation;

*

to help foster sustainable and inclusive private sector-led growth and employment as the most
importantmeans of improving economic opportunity for all Bosnians; and

*

to help build social sustainability by establishing affordable and equitable social services for all
Bosnians, including a social safety net for the most vulnerable.

In order to continue the policy-reform supportive role consistent with our comparative advantage,
the FYOO-02CAS proposes continued emphasis on policy reforms. Under a base case of strong macro
performance and good progress in the reform areas set out above, a program of both adjustment and
investment lending in the three main areas outlined is proposed, underpinned by a strong AAA program.
Both the AAA program and policy reform dialogue will contribute to the authorities' EDS and its PRSP.
Reform measures and activities important to reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina's postwar
context are key elements in each of these areas. In terms of lending, our CAS Progress Report (August
1998) noted that while high postwar growth rates had brought per capita incomes near the IDA
operational cut-off, we expected Bosnia and Herzegovina to be an IDA borrower during the IDA12
period (and that the earliest date creditworthinessfor IBRD lending could be achievable was late in this
period). This assessment remains valid. It is clear, though, that the extraordinary level of IDA resources
provided to Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last several years must now decrease to levels consistent
with other IDA recipients. Sufficient resources are nevertheless required in order for the Bank to be able
to continue to carry out its strong policy-reform leadership role in this critical next two to three year
period. Thus an IDA allocation that declines to normal per capita levels by the outset of the next CAS in
FY03 - which could coincide with the timing of creditworthiness - is warranted.
Risks of an internal and external nature during this CAS period remain similar to the key risks
highlighted in the CAS Progress Report. The most serious internal risk relates to continued weak and
fragmented governance in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the implications for the authorities' commitment
to reform. We believe that the lessons learned in the previous CAS have helped us to design a program
that takes into account this risk and mitigates it to the extent possible. The Stability Pact for Southeast
Europe provides a framework for potential increased stability in the Region, helping to reduce the key
external risk of continuing political uncertainty in the Region.
Suggested Topics for Board Discussion
Among the topics for Board discussion could be:
*

The development challenges and priorities highlighted for Bosnia and Herzegovina over the next
several years;

*

The policy-reform supportive role proposed for the World Bank Group, and the appropriateness of
the mix of planned instruments and activities; and

*

The risks identified and the mitigation measures proposed.

v

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSSISTANCE STRATEGY
FYOO-02
I. Introduction
1.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) covers the period FYO0-02. It builds on the strategic priorities
set out in the first full CAS for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH) covering FY98-99, discussed by the Board of
Directors in August 1997, and the FY99 Progress Report discussed in August 1998. This CAS was prepared on
the basis of consultations with the authorities, donors and a range of stakeholders (para. 42).
2.
BH's over-riding challenge as it enters the first decade of the 21st century is self-sustainability. This is
the path to a future of greater opportunity for all Bosnians. Four years of devastating war have been followed
by four years of substantial dependence on external technical and financial assistance. While this assistance
brought successful reconstruction and recovery, BH now must begin to stand on its own economic feet. It must
look to the international community not for aid flows but for investment resources, management know-how and
trading partners in a Europe that is expanding in the context of the Stability Pact for Southeast Europe. To do
this, it must commit to deeper, more unified and consistent reforms. With recovery, a tenuous healing process
has also begun, but it needs to be nurtured. Greater voice and participation of Bosnian citizens are needed to
help build social and political consensus, create stronger governance and reduce ethnic divisions. As a step
toward greater self-sustainability, the BH government is preparing its first Economic Development Strategy
which will set out reform measures and priorities for 2000-2004. While strategy formulation is underway, it
has been broadly discussed in BH and there has been a substantial meeting of the minds between the Bank and
the authorities on its key elements (Section III). The next two years will be critical in establishing the policy
reform framework needed to ensure that this Development Strategy brings BH closer to the vision of a stable
and prosperous future for all.
II. Recent Developments
A. Political Context
3.
BH's political institutions and inter-relationships have slowly matured, but gains are subject to
setbacks. Compared with the starting point of the last CAS, the functioning of new State institutions mandated
by the Dayton Peace Agreement, and the cooperation between BH's two constituent Entities - the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (the Federation), and the Republika Srpska - have improved over the last two years.
Following country-wide elections in September 1998,the tri-partite State-level Presidency appointed a Council
of Ministers (COM) which has managed government business consistently and reasonably well. Indicative of
government fragility, however, the COM is currently temporarily suspended following a ruling of the
Constitutional Court that its structure is unconstitutional.2 In Republika Sprska, the current Entity government
has brought a pragmatic interest in working with the Federation, which has been reciprocated by the Federation
government. But the current Republika Srpska government is in a care-taker position, with a slim support base.
Moreover, the close economic integration of Republika Srpska with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY)
has made it vulnerable to negative spillover effects from political instability there. In the Federation, internal
difficulties continue between the Bosniak and Croat partners; economic and political ties between Croatia and
the southern part of the Federation have at times undermined the Entity's unity. While other developments
have helped consolidate the country's political framework - among them the long-awaited arbitration of Brcko
IThe preparation of this CAS was delayed by the 1999 Kosovo crisis, and therefore the CAS period covers FYOO-02.
Constitutional Court ruled that the configuration of two Co-Chairmen and one Deputy Co-Chair (representing each of the three
constituent groups) was not consistent with the Constitution; this arrangement is likely to be replaced by one Chairman post, to rotate
among the three parties, and the COM is expected to reconvene shortly.
2The

which resolved the last wartime boundary dispute - overall, the political landscape remains highly uncertain.
The ethnic divide remains deep, as witnessed by demonstrations following sentencing of those indicted on war
crimes by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In recent municipal elections,
while Bosniaks voters shifted overwhelminglytowards a moderate, non-nationalist party, Serb and Croat voters
favored the nationalist parties (despite, for example, recent changes in Croatia where voters have backed a
moderate, pro-reform party). National elections this fall are difficult to predict.
4.
Cooperation has improved, but pursuit of separate rather than common objectives has delayed
reforms. Underlying BH's governance structure remains the fact that the Dayton Agreement was an
externally-generated compromise that left dissatisfaction on all sides. Compromise and consensus continue to
be difficult. While it is one country, BH is comprised of two separate and distinct Entities - which hold the
lion's share of responsibility for economic management (Box 3) - and of three constituent peoples who often
see their interests as separate rather than joint. Cooperation between the three groups and two Entities has
improved markedly when compared with the outset of the last CAS period. However, on economic matters the
parties frequently pursue separate agendas rather than working toward consensus needed to implement policy
reform. Illegal "parallel" institutions affiliated with these groups have been slow to disband, in particular in the
Federation, and have complicated reform of customs and tax administration, the payment bureaus and public
utilities. Misuse of public funds has been alleged in this context. The Office of the High Representative
(OHR), charged with overseeing civilian implementation of the Dayton accords, has on occasion used the
power delegated to it to impose legislation, albeit sparingly. While this has prevented gridlock from stalling
progress due to lack of agreement among the parties, it also discourages ownership of tough reforms. Weak
and fragmented governance remains the most serious impediment to implementing reforms needed for
sustainable economic growth.
B. Economic Performance

5.
Strengthened institutions and policies have contributed to macro stability. The authorities embarked
in May 1998 on an ambitious economic reform program, supported by IDA adjustment lending (under the
previous CAS) and an IMF Stand-by Arrangement (SBA) - which may be converted to a Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility later this year. The objectives of this program have been to create a unified economic space
and a functioning banking system, privatize and restructure enterprises, reform the labor market, reshape the
pension and health systems, implement a simplified customs system, and liberalize the trade regime.
Underlying these reform plans is an ongoing macroeconomic stabilization program based on a currency board
arrangement, accompanied by strict fiscal discipline. In large part, results have been good. There has been
sound macro management and steady, if sometimes slow, progress towards building institutions and policies
needed for economic management. The most successful achievement over the last two years has been full
establishment of BH's Central Bank and launching of its currency -- the Konvertibile Marka (KM), pegged to
the Deutsche Mark. The KM is now well-established and has gained credibility throughout the country. Other
achievements include adoption of a liberal country-wide customs tariff regime, elimination of barriers to the
internal movement of people and goods and substantially increased inter-Entity trade. There has been progress
on pension and health system reform. On the fiscal side, discipline has been maintained - the 1999 budget
deficit for the Federation was held to about 1.3 percent of GDP, and 3.5 percent in Republika Srpska (both
financed by donors) - and credible efforts are underway to improve Entity expenditure management. However,
tax policy lacks stability, harmonization between the Entities has taken time and remains incomplete, and tax
evasion is widespread - all of which contribute to fiscal fragility.
6.

Spurred by donor-funded reconstruction, growth has remained strong. In tandem with good macro

performance, major progress has been made in reconstruction over the last two years. The 1996-1999 Priority
Reconstructionand Recovery Program (PRRP), endorsedby intemationaldonors and the BH govemment in 1995,
has brought repair of the bulk of war-damaged economic and social infrastructure and has spurred economic
growth. By the end of 2000, it is anticipatedthat road, telecom, power, water and education services, will be at or
near prewar availability levels, a substantial achievement in just four years (Annex 1). Aid flows and
2

macroeconomic stability have together generated
m
oe i
l ha
fromether
high
GDP growth rate
strong growth. Though down from the very high
80%
postwar levels, GDP isestimated to have grown by 10
60%
percent in1999(Chart
1)~BH thusappears
tohave
0
weathered the economic impact of the 1999 Kosovo
20%
conflict
(disruption
of trade,
thecostof additional
~~ ~~~~~~0%
refugees)
better
thansome of the countries
of
1999
Southeast Europe (SEE).4 Growth patterns indicate

Chart1.BH: Evolution
of GDPlevelandGDPgrowth
1990-1999

GDP US$ billion

15
10

5.

0
1990 1991 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
1992-1993 GDP not

that recoveryis led by SMEsin the servicesand light

GDP level

.

Source: World Bank estimates

j

sectors, likely to be leaders of growth in the
medium term (para. 22).

- -+-- - GDP growxthlratXIindustry

7.
But stalled progress on structural reforms means recovery is not yet sustainable. Economic
recovery has been achieved largely on the strength of substantial financial and technical assistance from the
international community. Progress implementing the structural reforms needed to consolidate these
achievements and move towards sustainable growth has been disappointingly slow. At the heart of the problem
lies inconsistent commitment to reform. The process of weighing difficult policy trade-offs and acting on them
is often complicated by BH's fragmented postwar govemance and weak social and political consensus. As a
result, enterprise privatization was delayed and the process has been dominated by ethnic considerations (para.
24). BH's rigid labor laws are proving difficult to amend. Perhaps most seriously, discretionary administrative
intervention in the economy limits private sector development and encourages potential corruption. Little has
been done to improve the poor legislative environment, reduce excessive fiscal burden on enterprises and
eliminate costly administrative barriers that dissuade investors and present occasions for rent-seeking and
discrimination. Slow progress in transition reforms has contributed to a weak private sector response and
high unemployment.
8.
Finally, while they have narrowed, important economic differences still distinguish the two
Entities. GDP per capita in Republika Srpksa is just 75 percent of the country's average, due to a later start to
donor assistance and recovery and weaker integration with the international economy (e.g., until the end of last
year, continued use of the FRY dinar there meant higher inflation and the erosion of dinar-denominated income
and savings). Differences in Entity incomes mean differing capacities to address poverty (para. 9) and to
manage external debt, which is similar in absolute value in the two Entities (para. 39). Over time, as barriers to
the movement of labor, goods and capital across Entities are removed - reinforcing BH as one economic space
- and as links with the SEE Region, Europe, and the global economy are strengthened, living standards should
converge. Policies should continue to be geared toward accelerating this.
C. Social Context
9.
While reconstruction has led to increased incomes, most Bosnians remain worse off than before the
war. Although deprivation was widespread at war's end (Box 1), four years of reconstruction and growth have
brought dramatic increases in income and well-being. Per capita incomes have more than doubled to about
US$1,080, (from US$456 at end-1995). Household surveys provide evidence of increasing per capita
consumption. Basic services such as water, education and health care are now broadly available in most areas
(although with uneven quality and cost-effectiveness). Progress has also been achieved in some of the other
dimensions of human deprivation that affected postwar BH; e.g., improved conditions for return of refugees and
the displaced, notably physical security, has led to increasing numbers of minority returns, (although slow

Growth rates reached 69% in 1996, 30% in 1997, 13% in 1998 and 10% in 1999 (down from a projected 16% due to the Kosovocrisis). These rates brought GDP from US$1.9 billion (1995) to an estimated US$4.6 billion (1999).
4 Southeast Europe includes Albania, BH, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and FRY
(comprised of the Republic of Montenegro, and the Republic of Serbia, of which Kosovo is a province).
3

3

refugee return remains a key social issue in BH).5 But most
Chart 2. SEERegion: GNP per capita..
Bosnians remain far worse off than they were before the war
1998
began. And despite high postwar growth rates, BH remains
o
Aibania
_1H
the second-poorest country in the SEE Region on a per capita
Bulgaria
1,230
i
basis (Chart 2). While there are many estimates, there is no
Croatia
4 50
reliable recent data on poverty incidence based on a
,2Ei
FYR Macedonia-3
(A Living Standards
comprehensive household survey.
.39
Romania
Measurement Survey and Poverty Assessment would be key
,223l
SEEAVERAGE
elements of this CAS, and would be important inputs to
1,900 2,((9
3,9(9 4,001) 5.9)111)
uSs.
development of BH's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (para.
Source: World Bank estimates
15).) The best currently available survey data (from 1997)
suggest that 27 percent of Bosnians fall below a relative
poverty line, while 11 percent fall below an extreme poverty line.6 This data also suggest that regional
disparities are high: About half the population of Republika Srpska fell below the poverty line, and substantial
differences existed among the Federation's cantons (Sarajevo and West Herzegovina having the lowest poverty
incidence). The ethnic correlation of these regional disparities (and the differing Entity and regional capacities
to address them) will present politically difficult and potentially divisive policy challenges.
Box 1. The Legacy of War on Everyday Lives
While BH was one of the poorer of SFRY's republics prior to the war, income distribution was relatively even and
there was little abject poverty. With the massive economic contraction brought by war, GDP per capita fell from US$2,429
in 1990 to US$456 in 1995 - bringing deprivation of an all-encompassingnature to most Bosnians. Widespread loss of
jobs was the primary impact on household economic status. But deprivation was not limited to income. Assets - housing,
automobiles, farm equipment,household possessions - were lost or destroyed. Bank deposits were frozen. Basic electricity
and water services were not available. Access to education and health services was interrupted. Official institutions and
programs, such as for social protection, were bankrupted with collapsed governmentbudgets. Among the most significant
impacts, over two million people - nearly half the prewar population - were forced from or chose to leave their homes and
became refugees, either abroad or displaced internally within BH. With these population movements commnunity-and
family-basedsocial networks were also seriously disrupted. Physical security also has become a risk for many, particularly
ethnic minorities in majority areas, given weak law enforcement and remaining tensions.
Four years after the end of the war, the situation has improved dramatically for most Bosnians. In spite of these
gains, however, consultations in the context of the "Voices of the Poor" in 1999 noted that: "...the combinedpressure of...
transition and wartime devastation has placed many people on the margins of economic existence. Their current privations
contrast sharply with a relatively comfortable prewar "normal life. "... Participants consistently identified unemployment
as their principal concern... People at all sites described searching for any kind of work and relying on occasional,
informal labor. Many expressed strong desires for regular employment... Lacking employment opportunities in the
country, many younger people seek to emigrate... "

10. Unemployment is a key determinant of poverty. Registered unemployment reached 37 percent in the
Federation and 36 percent in Republika Srpska in 1998 (and has stagnated).' These rates are among the highest
in the Region, with only Macedonia on the same scale. While a significant share of the registered unemployed
generate some income in the informal sector, survey data suggest that households where the head is
unemployed are three to five times poorer than households where the head is employed. Several other groups
are particularly vulnerable to poverty, including the internally displaced (nearly 40 percent of the poor have one
household member who is displaced). Children and the elderly are more at risk of poverty, as are single female

Of a total 1.2 million refugees and 865,000 internally displaced at the end of 1995, some 650,000 had returned to their homes by the
end of 1999, the vast majority to same-ethnic areas. Over 80 percent were to the Federation. Several hundred thousand refugees have
found permanent homes abroad (UNHCR).
6 Due to data limitations, these poverty lines are based on relative adjusted per capita income. The two lines are drawn at 60 percent
("base poverty") and 30 percent ("extreme poverty") of the median of adult-equivalent economies of scale adjusted per capita-income
distribution. Poverty and Inequality in BH (Draft), 2000 (based on 1997 CIET survey data).
7 Figures include workers on "waiting lists," who do not work, however retain a right to be called back to work.
5

4

(often widowed) heads of households. While there is no urban/rural breakdown available, there has been
marked rural-to-urban migration in the postwar period (and evidence suggests agriculture has declined as a
source of income). These findings are consistent with a 1998 Social Assessment and the 1999 "Voices of the
Poor" consultations (Box 1). BH's social services structures are inadequate to provide for the needs of these
groups. The social safety nets inherited from the Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) remain,
without the public resources to fund them (and with variable capacities between and within the two Entities).
Direct donor support has helped fill the gaps over the last several years. Reconstruction and recovery have
brought generalized improvement in welfare; planning for a more targeted poverty-alleviation strategy that
addresses BH's specific postwar challenges is now needed.
D. The External Environment
11. Declining external support will require well-managed fiscal adjustment. BH faces a major change in
its external environment during the CAS period. Over the last four years a large external financing requirement
has been met by donor resources associated with the PRRP. With the formal end of the PRRP, donor aid flows
will now begin to decline from their exceptionally high level and concessionality to those associated with more
normal development needs. It is estimated that about US$3.5 billion of the over US$5 billion pledged for
reconstruction had been disbursed by end-1999.8 The remainder is expected to be disbursed over the course of
the next two to three years, consistent with the historic pace of converting commitmentsto expenditures. Thus,
reduced commitments are not expected to translate
Chart

3. BH: Donor

US$ billions

Commitments

into

and

signifcantly reduced spendig levels for
another 24 months or so (Chart 3). Nevertheless, it
will be important for the authorities to plan now
for the measures needed to ensure fiscal balance
this shift takes place, includingreduced public
spending and enhanced revenues, increased private

Disbursements

2.50

1996 - 2004

2.00 T
1.50

-

100-

=

Disbursesents
=

_as

0.50
0.00

1996

1997

1998 1999 2000

2001 2002

investment, and progress toward creditworthiness.
Even with such measures, however, BH will
continue to require additional aid flows to maintain

2003 2004

externalpaymentsviability(para.37).

SourceWB/ECDonordatabase
andBankstaffestimates

12. Closer links to Europe offer economic and political opportunity. A second external development that
will have marked impact is enhanced economic and political linkage with Europe through the recentlyannounced Stability Pact for SEE. The Stability Pact offers links with European and global institutions as an
external "pull" to help stimulate democratic and market-oriented reforms and reduce the risk of continued
conflict in the SEE countries.9 It is also hoped that the Stability Pact will lead to reduced military spending and
an increased "peace dividend," and that greater stability in the Region will enhance the potential for foreign
investment. Closer integration with the EU and its institutions would be achieved through Stabilization and
Association Agreements (SAAs) that would govern political, economic and trade relations between the
European Union (EU) and the countries of the Region.10 To take advantage of these closer ties, however,
countries of the Region will need to undertake more systematic structural and political reforms, in particular
in four areas: (i) trade (toward integration with the SEE Region and the EU) and private sector development;
(ii) social inclusion to secure a climate for political stability; (iii) improved institutional capacity and
governance; and (iv) development of regional infrastructure to physically integrate the Region. Minimum
8 Preliminary estimate; actual donor reporting of disbursements and expenditures for end-1999 has not been completed.

Major donors have assigned the Bank and the European Commission (EC) responsibility for coordinating economic assistance to the
Region, and the Stability Pact gives the Bank and the EU a special mandate to coordinate a comprehensive regional approach to
development in the Region. The framework for this approach is set out in the report The Road to Stability and Prosperity in South
Eastern Europe: A Regional Strategy Paper, March 2000, The World Bank.
'0 To illustrate, a first SAA with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) is to be negotiated this year, and will include
enhanced regional cooperation leading (after ten years) to a free-trade area between the EU and FYROM, and increasing conformity of
FYROM's legislative frameworkwith that of Europe.

5

conditions for the EU to embark on a Feasibility Study, the first step in this process, are being developed for
BH. These conditions are likely to include trade and private-sector oriented economic measures (reforming the
payments' bureau, establishing a modern treasury, further harmonizing trade policies of the Entities), and
governance- and social inclusion-related measures (improving conditions for refugee return, strengthening the
judiciary, implementing a new property law and a new election law). The Stability Pact provides substantial
opportunity for BH: As a small country with a limited domestic market, BH will be dependent on expanding
exports to sustain growth - in particular to the EU, its main postwar trading partner. Moreover, closer linkage
to Europe is a widely-shared goal in BH that has the potential to be politically unifying.
III. Bosnia and Herzegovina's Development Challenges and Priorities
A. Development Challenges
13. BH is now at a crossroads. Over the next two to three years, BH will pass through a critical phase of its
postwar development, during which it must prepare to stand on its own economically, as donor financial and
technical support decreases. The country faces two critical developmentchallenges in the period ahead:
*

The first is to take ownership of its economic future by assuming increased responsibility for economic
policies and outcomes. This will mean strengthening governance at all levels and reducing dependence on
the international community. Proactively consulting with Bosnian citizens on issues that affect their
economic future will be importantto improved governance in BH's post-conflict setting.

* The second is to promote sustainable growth and employment that provides increasing incomes and
opportunities for all Bosnians. This will require accelerated reforms aimed at increasing private sector
activity, as well as measures to ensure that growth is inclusive. In parallel, safety nets must be put in place
for those who cannot feel the full benefits of growth. In the near term, reducing unemployment will be key
to reducing poverty and enhancing opportunity.
Addressing these two development challenges - and consistently pursuing the policy reforms they require - will
be critical to ensuring that BH can stand on its own feet as the international community steps back. Meeting
these challenges will also help to bring about long-term reconciliation by ensuring all members of Bosnian
society have a stake in the economic future. Finally, meeting these challenges will help build the vision of a
prosperous and stable country increasingly integrated into Europe - a vision embodied in the Dayton
Agreement and increasingly shared by many in BH.
B. Economic DevelopmentPriorities
14. A first Bosnian Economic Development Strategy. As a key step in taking increased ownership for
economic outcomes, the Bosnian authorities are now preparing an Economic Development Strategy (EDS) for
the period 2000-2004 which will be presented to a first Consultative Group (CG) meeting later this year. The
EDS will be a Bosnian-owned strategy that is intended to replace the PRRP as the strategic basis for policy and
spending decisions in BH, and to serve as a framework to guide external development assistance. (Annual CG
meetings will replace Donor Conferences of the past four years; para. 46). A team comprised of representatives
from the two Entities and coordinated by the State is spearheading the EDS, which is being prepared in a
participatory manner, and will be broadly consistent with the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF).
The EDS builds on strategy formulation initiatives underway in the context of a Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) exercise supported by the Bank and other donors (para. 21). It also builds on work
underway in the context of the Feasibility Study for closer association with EU institutions. Development of
country performance indicators (to measure both outcomes/impacts and intermediate inputs/outputs) in the
context of overall development goals will be a key component of the EDS. An initial Framework Paper
prepared by the authorities sets out key challenges (Box 2).
6

Box 2. Framework for EconomicDevelopment in Bosnia and Herzegovina - 2000-2004
A draft framework paper prepared by the authorities sets out seven key development priorities for BH over the
course of the next several years:"
*

*

*

*
*
*

*

Fiscal management. Stable public finances will be important in the context of decreasing aid flows. Better planning
and budgeting of public expenditures, and increased accountability of government for expenditures at all levels are
needed. Debt management and enhanced creditworthinessare key objectives.
Fighting poverty. Unemployment is the key determinant of poverty. Labor market reforms are needed, along with
reduction of payroll and other taxes, adult education and retraining, and equitable social protection programs. The
government has committed, with donor assistance, to developing reliable poverty and social sector statistics and to
preparing a comprehensivepoverty reduction strategy.
Development of a market-oriented private economy. The core reforms identified are appropriate legal, fiscal and
regulatory arrangements, labor force flexibility, creation of a single economic space in the country, completion of
privatization of SMEs, and progress on large enterprise privatization.
Institution building. Institutionsneed to be strengthened throughoutthe public sector, and the confidence of citizens in
a governmentthat will protect their rights and propertymust be built.
Completion of reconstruction. Significant challenges remain in reconstruction, including housing, demining, and
environmentalprotection, and local infrastructure.
Access to WTO and European integration. Enhanced trade with Europe, the biggest potential market for BH goods
and services, is emphasized; the Stability Pact is seen as a key path to that objective. Reaching a Stabilization and
Association Agreement is a priority, along withjoining the WTO.
Fighting corruption and the gray economy. The impact of corruption on private investment and fiscal revenues is
recognized; refonn of both institutions and policies are needed to reduce corruption and shift activity from the informal
into the formal economy.

15. Making poverty reduction central to the development strategy. Building on the EDS, and integrally
linked to it, the government of BH has also undertaken to develop a comprehensive Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP) that addresses the complex human and social deprivation many Bosnians face. (With the
constraints of poor data, a full PRSP is being possible only in 2002 once basic surveys have been conducted; in
the meantime, an Interim-PRSP is being prepared on the basis of currently-available information.) The
overarching objective of the Bosnian authorities, following the economic devastation caused by four years of
war, is spurring growth and reducing painfully high unemployment. GDP has recovered to only half of the
prewar level in four years. Recovering sustainable growth - and the macroeconomic stability and structural
reforms needed to achieve this - will be the most important element in a poverty reduction strategy. Given'the
high correlation between poverty and unemployment, growth that generates significant employment will be
critical to an inclusive growth strategy. Labor legislation reforms to improve labor market flexibility and
reduce the cost to firms of hiring workers will be key. Administrative and legal changes in the business
environment to increase enterprise activity - especially the SMEs that are likely in the near term to lead growth
and job creation - will be important. Policy harmonization (tax and customs) reforms in the Entities to create
one economic space will also help ensure more even and inclusive growth across the country, given wide
regional income disparities. However a growth strategy alone is not sufficient. The PRSP will need to address
not only increased opportunity (including employment and incomes, but also affordable and quality education
and health services). It must address greater empowerment and voice (less discrimination, stronger, more
accountable and pro-poor institutions and greater public dissemination of information), and enhanced physical
security (well-targeted safety nets and more effective policing). Providing advice and technical assistance to
the team developing the EDS and the I-PRSP/PRSP (the two are being prepared by the same core team to
ensure full complementarity) will be a priority, and a significant portion of the AAA planned under the FY0002 CAS will help lay the analytical and statistical groundwork for these two important efforts. Among the

IIGlobal Framework for Economic Development and Social Protection in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2000-2004, March 2000, BH
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations.

7

Bank's challenges in BH will continue to be expanding the discussion of development objectives beyond the
postwar focus on growth and employment towards a broader definition of poverty reduction.
16. During the course of CAS preparation, the Bank and the government have discussed and agreed in broad
terms on four priorities areas that form the key components of the EDS. Each of these will also have a critical
role in increasing opportunity and reducing poverty: (i) strengthening governance; (ii) fostering private sector
led growth; (iii) building social sustainability; and (iv) completing reconstruction.
Strengthening Institutions and Governance12
17. Stronger institutions and governance will be needed to achieve BH's development objectives. The
pace of institutional change is often slow, even in countries with strong public sectors and cohesive political
environments. In BH, newly-established institutions, fragmented government structures and "ethnic
competition," mean developing good governance will be a long-term objective. But this work is nevertheless
critical, since strong and accountable institutions and good governance are pre-conditions to sustained success
in other reform areas - e.g., transparent and efficient public finance management provides a foundation for
sustainable growth; responsive, representative local institutions play an essential role in promoting social
inclusion and reducing poverty; and more mature political institutions will be required for gradual integration
with European institutions. While good governance entails a range of issues, the key medium-term priorities in
BH, given its post-conflict context and current development challenges, center on: (i) enhancing the
transparency of public institutions; and (ii) developing and implementing a medium-term fiscal adjustment
strategy that (a) sets clear rules for intergovernmentalfinance; (b) enhances revenue mobilization, and (c)
ensures reduced and more efficient public spending. Moreover, while technical capacity is high in many
sectors in BH, the country's new institutional structures mean that capacity building is a critical cross-cutting
theme to which most donors, including the Bank, have contributed in one way or another over the last four
years (e.g., setting up and strengthening debt and budget management units, bank supervision agencies, and a
range of other sectoral institutions). Continued technical assistance for capacity building is a long-term
development need. Governance challenges also include stimulating greater private sector activity by creating
an appropriate business enabling environment (para. 23) and ensuring greater public dissemination of
information (e.g., on economic policy trade-offs and social service standards) to ensure institutional
accountability (para. 32).
18.
Increased transparency. The war gravely eroded the integrity of government institutions and the rule of
law. Corruption not only dampens growth but has also been shown to affect the poor disproportionately. Recent
surveys have shown that BH has one of the lowest rankings in the SEE Region (already low compared with Central
Europe and other regions) on transparency-relatedindicators. Over the past four years, Bank-supportedprojects
(in particular,two Public Finance StructuralAdjustment Credits (PFSACI; FY98 and II; FY99)) have helped build
accountability into the use of both domestically-generatedand donor-provided public funds, through increased
audit capabilities, strengthened expenditure and debt management,and accountable public procurement review,
among other initiatives. Specific precautionswere put in place for Bank-fundedoperations from the outset of our
involvement (para. 43). Other donors have supported improved customs monitoring, reform of the payments
bureaus, and other initiatives. However, a comprehensiveprogram of institutional and policy reforms is needed to
promote transparency and accountability in public sector management. This will require both "upstream" reforms
(such as more realistic, open and consultative medium-term budget planning), as well as credible "downstream"
controls (such as an effective Treasury, independent and capable Supreme Audit Institutions, effective internal
audit procedures and expansion of the procurement functions to cover all government and donor expenditures).
Strengthenedjudiciary and rule of law is an important element of transparent institutions. The primary focus to
date has been establishment of the Constitutional Court and strengthening of the State prosecutor's office.
12

Governance here is referred to broadly to include "the role and performance of government in relation to a country's economic, social

and political institutions."

Reforming Public Institutions and Strengthening

Dec. 30, 1999.

8

Governance, A World Bank Strategy (Discussion Draft),

However a wider judicial reform agenda remains, including new systems for the appointment of judges and the
separate budgetingof the court system, along with legal reforms needed for private sector development,including
arbitration,competitionand insurance. These efforts have been spearheadedby OHR and the EU.
19.
Better rules for intergovernmentalfinance. The Dayton Agreement provides for differences in intraEntity fiscal arrangements(Box 3). Allocating local public-expenditureresponsibilities and revenues between the
levels of government in an efficient and equitable manner is a key policy issue, particularly in the Federation.
Among the most pressing issues is developing mechanisms to effectively finance and deliver services with
geographic spillovers, such as higher education and health, especially in poorer regions. The legacy of conflict
exacerbates the need and the challenges involved, since dealing with equity consideration among regions remains
difficult due to the low political tolerance for cross-subsidiesamong ethnic groups. Nevertheless, addressingthese
issues will be critical to a poverty reduction strategy. Revenue allocation between the local governments,
includingthrough re-definingrevenueattributionrules and preventingtax exemptions, is also important.
Box 3. DaytonGovernanceArrangements
The DaytonAgreementsoughtto ensuremaximumautonomyto BH's two Entities.The Entitieshave exclusive
responsibilityin their territoriesfor defense, internal affairs, economicand social sector policies, resettlementand
reconstruction,
justice,tax andcustomsadministration.Theyhaveownershipof customsdutiesandexcisetaxes. The State
governmenthas a restrictedrole, responsiblefor foreignaffairs,customspolicy,monetarymanagmenet,externaldebtand
inter-Entityinfrastructure.It has no independentsourceof revenueanddependson transfersfromthe Entities.
The Entities have vastly differentstructures. RepublikaSrpskaremainshighly centralized,with minimallocal
servicefunctionsand revenuesdelegatedto its 51 municipalities.The Federation'sstructurewas intendedto allowgreater
local controlover servicelevels,given the needto accommodatethe two Federationpartners;thus, all responsibilitiesnot
explicitlyassignedto the Entity(includingeducation,housing,public servicesand socialtransfers)are devolvedto its ten
cantons,and each canton is authorizedto furtherdelegateresponsibilitiesto the 81 municipalities.(Brcko, with three
municipalities,
wasrecentlydesignateda separatedistrict.)Cantonshavesales,incomeandpropertytaxes,as wellas local
userfees. Manycantonsandmunicipalitiesare far frombeingableto assumethese responsibilities.Decisionsare yet to be
maderegardingthe joint provisionof servicesto ensureefficiency,and intergovernmental
transfersto supportequity-and
efficiency-enhancing
arrangements.
20. Improved revenue mobilization. The past two years have seen progress in simplifying and harmonizing
tax policy and strengthening tax administration under the PFSAC program and the SBA. Nevertheless, to
increase revenues while creating an environment conducive to private investment, greater effort is needed.
Strengthened fiscal capacity will be critical to the credibility and, hence, sustainability of the structural reform
process and robustness of the supply response. Tax rates should be further reduced as the high tax burden
discourages compliance and is a disincentive to private investment. To ensure budget revenues are not
jeopardized, these reductions should be phased to correspond to broadening of the tax base and increases in
private sector activity. For example, to protect payroll contributions to pension, health and unemployment
insurance, the payroll tax base needs to be broadened and enforcement rules strengthened. Further tax reforms
- particularly of sales and excise taxes - should be deepened over the next two years to begin to align BH's tax
system with European norms. Ongoing efforts to rationalize and modernize tax and customs administrative
structures should be accelerated. Other public revenue instruments are also important, such as utility user
charges. In many sectors efforts are underway (supported by ongoing Bank operations) to review and revise
tariff levels and structures to ensure progressive covering of economic costs.
21. Reduced and more efficientpublic spending. With the reconstructioneffort comingto a close, the need for
large public investments (public expenditures in the 1996-1999 period averaged over 65 percent of GDP) will
decline sharply and public spending plans should reflect this. A large portion of this decrease will come about
naturally as a consequence of the decline in capital investment as the reconstruction program winds down.
However,cuts in recurrentexpenditure levels will also be needed. In many cases these will be politically difficult.
For example, military spending - 9 percent of budgeted spending in Republika Sprska and 12 percent in the
Federation(5-6 percent of Entity GDP) - will need to be cut through demobilizationof soldiers, for which Dayton
9

and subsequent internationalagreements set targets. Entitlements for veterans and war invalids and their families
(4 percent of Entity GDP) will need to be targeted to the truly needy (para. 29). Reform to streamlineand reduce
BH's large and complex postwar civil service is also needed, requiring establishment of merit-based hiring and
better definition of functional responsibilities. Within a reduced overall spending envelope, expenditures must
then be reoriented towards high priorities such as social assistance, operating costs for social services, and
maintenance for those portions of newly-rehabilitatedinfrastructurethat will remain publicly-managed(e.g., the
road network). Work is currently underway in the context of a Medium-TermExpenditure Framework exercise
supported by IDA (under PFSAC II) to effectively ensure aggregate fiscal discipline within a coherent
macroeconomicframework,and improve strategic resource allocation and efficient resource use. The MTEF aims
to develop capacity to manage expenditures consistent with resource constraints and sector policies. This work
should be expanded,and will be a key tool in preparingthe EDS as well as the PRSP.
Fostering Private Sector-LedGrowth and Employment
22. Deeper and more consistent structural reforms are needed for sustainable growth and employment.
The pace of structural reform in BH has lagged behind that of the other countries of the SEE Region - a region
which is already lagging its Central European neighbors (Table 1). The impact of conflict and the associated
political risk and uncertainty have contributed in part to this slow performance.13 But a more aggressive reform
effort over the next several years is essential to sustainable growth. Growth that generates employment will be
a key element of BH's poverty reduction strategy. Growth in the coming years is likely to come from a
combinationof private sector led efficiencygains (e.g., recovery of underutilized capacity and allocation towards
goods in which BH has a comparative advantage) and output expansion via start-ups and new investment. It is
likelythat much activity in the near tenn will come from the SME sector. As in many more-developedeconomies,
BH's SME sector is likely to be the source of fastest employmentgrowth (as well as a catalyst of innovation and
entrepreneurship), making SME growth important to poverty reduction. The key reform measures needed to
ensure this private sector-led response are: (i) promotion of new private activity through a transparent and
predictable enabling environment; (ii) transformation of outmoded socially-owned productive capacities into
operations that can stand on their own feet in open markets through privatization (or liquidation of non-viable
activities); (iii) reform of a dysfunctional and de-capitalizedbanking sector to ensure that productive activity can
operate in efficient financial markets; and (iv) reform of labor markets to promote mobility and create
employmentopportunitiesin the formal sector.
Table1. ProgressTowardReformin theRealSectorin the SEERegiona
Priv.Share
Enterprise
Competition Privatization
Of 1998GDP
ReformIndex
PolicyIndex
Index

Banking
Index

Albania

75

2.0

2.0

3.0

2.0

BH35.7h2.23
Bulgaria
Croatia
FYROM

57
60
55

2.3
2.7
2.0

2.0
2.0
1.0

3.0
3.7
3.5

2.0
2.3
1.7

Romania
60
2.0
2.0
3.0
2.0
SEE Avg.592293121
CEE Avg.b
70
2.9
3.0
4.0
3.2
a. Indexesdeveloped by EBRD; rankingsrange from I to 4+, with I lowest and 4+ highest(i.e., a standard that would not be out of place in
an industrializedmarket economy); EBRD Transition Report, 1999. b. Countries include: Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovak
Republic,Slovenia.Source: WorldBank staffestimates;EBRD TransitionReport, 1999.

Enabling environmentfor business. The cost to private firms of doing business in BH is high (Box 4).
The country is still dominated by a bureaucracy geared to the old socialist system, with some informal remnants
23.

13 In fact, BH's private sector share of GDP in 1998 was roughly comparable to that of the other SEE countries after the first five years
of transition - which may be a more appropriate benchmark, given BH's four lost years of war.

10

of ad hoc wartime arrangements. Costly administrative barriers create opportunities for rent-seeking and are
particularly onerous for SMEs. While many of the laws needed for a well-functioning private sector have been
promulgated (e.g., laws on privatization of enterprises and banks, amendments to the corporate and accounting
codes, laws on securities), others critical to business development have not, including a revised labor law, and
laws on restitution and bankruptcy (in Republika Srpska). Ownership rights remain unclear, contract law is
difficult to enforce, and the courts are slow and inefficient. Tax rates on business are high and the tax system is
complex. Development of a private banking sector has been hampered by government payment bureaus which
had, until recently, a monopoly on all domestic non-cash transactions. While there is a new liberal foreign
investment law (technical advice provided by FIAS), the above factors, combined with perceptions of political
risk, have dissuaded foreign investors from entering Bosnian markets. Administrative measures to simplify
business registration, passage of key laws, modification of the fiscal regime to lower the tax on labor,
strengthening the judiciary and measures to combat corruption are all priorities to stimulate growth and
employment.
Box 4. Constraintsto PrivateInvestmentandBusinessDevelopment
Administrative
Constraints
 A complex14stepbusinessregistrationprocesstakesmonthsto complete.
* Businesslaws and regulationsare biased againstsmall businessesas they often have significantand cumbersome
paperworkrequirementsforminorbut regularbusinessactivities.
. Inconsistentand contradictory
businessregulationsare difficultto followand exposebusinessesto feesfor unavoidably
breakinglaws,regulations,andcodes,encouragingcorruption.
 Opaquebusinesslawsandregulationsdiscourageforeignanddomesticbusinessdevelopment.
Legaland JudicialConstraints
* Thecourt systemis viewedas slowand inefficient(simplecivil suitscan takeas muchas 12monthsto resolve).
. Courtdecisionsare notbasedon precedent,and thereis skepticismregardingfairnessof decisions.
 Hightaxes on civilsuitsdiscouragebringingclaimsto court.
 Unclearownershiprights(land,public/privateownershipstructure)discouragebusinessinvestment.
FiscalConstraints
. Complicatedtax structures,includingunpredictableretroactivetaxes,discouragecompliance.
* Manytax lawsare biasedagainstnewandsmallbusinessesin favorlargestate-ownedcompanies.
* Highlevelsof taxationcutsintoretumson investmentleavinglittleincentiveto reportaccurately.
24. Accelerating privatization. The Entities have both passed legislation and embarked on comprehensive
programs to privatize all publicly owned enterprises and banks, the first phase of which is supported by an IDAfunded Enterprise and Bank Privatization Credit (EBPAC; FY99), and technical assistance from other donors
(e.g., for establishing privatization and bank supervision agencies). The EBPAC aimed to start privatization of
BH's SMEs (there are about 270 in the Federation and 150 in Republika Srpska) and to prepare for bank and
large scale enterprise privatization. Further support was planned under subsequent operations. While the
difficulties and risks of privatization had been flagged in the last CAS, lack of agreement among the constituent
groups (e.g., regarding establishment of privatization agencies and distribution of vouchers), and other issues
(e.g., the difficulty of determining asset ownership with complex refugee claims) delayed the start of
privatization longer than hoped. Sale of SMEs began recently, however, in both Entities. In the Federation,
nearly one-third of SMEs have now been privatized. Whereas progress on transactions in Republika Srpska has
been slower, with less than ten percent privatized, preparatory activities are well advanced. Preparations for
sale of BH's large enterprises - of which about 100 (half in each Entity) are considered strategically important
- is just beginning and only a handful have been sold to date."4 Foreign participation is encouraged, given the
need for new capital, technology, and marketing skills. Willingness to disengage from the productive sectors is
an obvious sign of commitment to private sector-led growth and progress toward benchmarks set under the
EBPAC will be a touchstone for gauging overall commitment to reforms (para. 54). The challenge, now that
privatization has begun, is accelerating the pace. In parallel, it will be important to ensure adequate safety nets
14

Thereare about2,400 largescaleenterprisesin total,some1,400inthe Federationand 1,000in RepublikaSrpksa

11

to backstop the adjustment process. Privatization of the telecom and energy utilities (starting with
commercialization and corporatization measures and revising sector legislation to encourage competition) is
also important to reducing the fiscal burden of the public sector and improving service quality. Finally, for
those sectors which have low productivity and for which demand will decrease - e.g., portions of the coal mines
- plans for restructuring should be considered.
25. Reforming the banking sector. Most of BH's 20 majority publicly-owned banks are weak, with nonperforming assets and an extremely low level of deposits. Its 37 private banks tend to be undercapitalized and
inexperienced. However, there has been positive movement in banking sector reform. Under the program
supported by the EBPAC, new Entity bank supervision agencies have been established and a major reform of
the payment bureaus is underway (their monopoly over transactions has been abolished, with functions being
gradually transferred to a modern treasury and the banking system). Privatization of banks has begun: In the
Federation privatization plans for four of the nine publicly-ownedbanks have been approved (efforts have been
underway for some time to privatize the development bank, and a divestiture plan for the largest bank has yet to
be agreed, since negotiation with foreign creditors has delayed a decision on the bank's solvency). In
Republika Srpska, four of the eleven state banks have submitted privatization plans. All banks operate on the
basis of permanent licenses and meet increased capital requirements. The banking sector has been contracting
through mergers and liquidations, and this healthy process is expected to continue as minimum capital
requirements are increased and privatization continues. Benchmarks on bank divestiture will also be an
importantdeterminant of commitment to reforms (para. 54).
26. Reforming labor markets. Sustainable growth depends on the economy's ability to reallocate resources,
including labor, away from low-productivityactivities into higher value-added sectors. Labor market flexibility
is also essential to mobility of workers. Increasing employment will be a key element of a poverty reduction
strategy. At present, the environment for creation of productive employment is not encouraging. Tax rates on
labor are high (the cumulative rate on gross income is up to 55 percent), discouraging hiring of new workers
and increasing incentives for informality. Labor legislation in both Entities enshrines centralized control of
labor relations, reinforcing rigidities in the labor market and creating onerous costs and hurdles which are felt
disproportionately by SMEs. The Entities are currently reviewing policies for wage setting, benefits, hiring and
firing, and severance with a view to amending existing legislation, in the context of technical assistance from
the Bank and a planned Social Sector Adjustment Credit (SOSAC). Improving employment services and job
counseling; redesigning BH's currently unaffordable unemployment insurance program; and retraining services
for skills needed in a market economy will be important as large scale privatization begins. Finally, revising
labor legislation and its implementation to prevent discrimination will also be an important social issue on
which the Bank, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and others are working.
Building Social Sustainability
27. Targeted programs and policies are required to complement stronger institutions and sustainable
growth. Providing all Bosnians a stake in the country's economic future will be key to BH's development into
a stable, peaceful and prosperous society and to poverty reduction. Social sustainability implies not only
broadly increasing incomes, but also improved human and social conditions, and reduced risk and vulnerability.
Together, these factors can also generate movement towards political reconciliation and prevention of future
conflict. In BH's post-conflict situation of dramatically reduced economic activity and incomes, sustainable
growth is a pre-condition for effective poverty reduction. But growth alone cannot bridge the gap in living
standards. Specifically designed and targeted interventions will be needed to ensure access to social services
and a minimum social safety net for the poorest. Medium term priorities include: (i) improving poverty and
social sector information and building statistics management capacity; (ii) reforming social protection
programs to balance resources with needs and ensure minimum assistance for the neediest; (iii) further
developing education and health services, their institutional frameworks and disseminating information on
quality and effectiveness; and (iv) promoting greater participation and inclusion to improve access and
opportunity on a more equal basis and to strengthen accountability and governance.
12

28. Poverty information and capacity building. Data on living standards in BH were not collected during
the war. Immediately following the war, it was impractical to develop an adequate baseline of information on
poverty and human development due to large scale population movements, rapidly changing income and
consumption patterns and weak institutional capacity. However, now that initial returns have taken place and
high postwar growth has slowed to more normal levels, a comprehensive data collection effort is needed.
Reliable poverty information will be key to developing targeted programs and appropriate policies for social
protection and poverty reduction. It will be an essential basis on which to develop the EDS and the full PRSP,
and will also facilitate establishment of poverty reduction and human development goals and monitoring
indicators, including measuring the relative impact of growth. At the same time, it will be important to build
the capacity of the State and Entity statistics agencies to develop and manage this data and to ensure closer
involvement of line ministries so that improved data informs policy development.
29. Social protection (pensions, veterans' benefits and social assistance). BH's postwar social protection
system has not yet adjusted from socialist structures, and includes unaffordable benefit programs. At the same
time, however, there are challenges that are peculiar to BH's postwar setting. For example, social protection,
like other public services, remains institutionally fragmented (de facto separate pension and health insurance
funds for BH's three constituent groups). Budgeted social protection spending is dominated by pensions and
entitlement-based benefits for war veterans - part of the wider issue of high military-related expenditures in
postwar BH. The small amount of social assistance that is publicly provided covers mainly those who cannot
work because of health conditions. These funds are distributed unevenly due to fragmented financing
mechanisms and varying priority given by local administrations. Priorities in the medium term include: (i)
development of an equitable and fiscally-viable social protection strategy prepared on the basis of
comprehensive poverty information; this will require politically difficult prioritization in order to improve the
poverty alleviation impact of transfer spending; (ii) pension reform to adjust both contribution and benefit
levels to ensure sustainability, while increasing minimum pensions to ensure at least subsistence payments for
the neediest pensioners (these reforms have begun under PFSAC II); (iii) reform of veterans' benefits programs
by cutting overall spending and improving targeting (politically difficult, given the fact that 55 percent of
households include an ex-soldier); and (iv) reform of social assistance cash transfer programs, by rationalizing
complex benefit structures, overhauling financing mechanisms, and improving targeting (alleviating the vicious
circle of areas of low financial capacity and high poverty).
30. Education. Physical reconstruction has restored basic service levels, so that enrollment rates are
consistent with those in the Region (Annex B5). Reforms are now needed to improve governance and
management, refocus spending on improved quality, and reform the secondary and higher education systems to
make them more responsive to the demands of an emerging market economy (emphasizing broad, flexible skills
and increasing consistency with European standards). Establishment of well-defined and standardized student
performance information country-wide is critical to ensuring the responsiveness of the education system.
Building capacity to use qualitative indicators to justify policy development and resource allocation decisions
will also be important. This focus on qualitative performance information should also help shift the debate over
education in BH from ethnic politics to education system performance in the context of increasing integration
with Europe.
31. Health. Progress has been made over the last two years in passing new health insurance laws which aim
at universal access to a basic package of health care, equal access to services and efficient financing and
delivery. However, these laws are not yet fully operational and current health insurance funds in both Entities
need reform. Postwar decentralization resulted in an unreasonably low level of risk pooling for health
insurance funds. As a consequence, BH-wide, a large share of GDP (over 12 percent, higher than most other
countries in the region) is spent on health care. More than one third of these expenditures are covered "out of
pocket," by private citizens (disproportionately from the poor, who identify the cost of health care as a key
concern). Institutional reforms to enhance risk pooling, build capacity and increase use of modern health
13

management methods are needed. Strengtheningdata collection and achieving greater community involvement
will also be important to improve monitoring, policy-making and equity of service provision.
32. Inclusion and participation. One of the greatest casualties of war was the weakening of bonds of trust
between individuals and social groups. Developing a culture of tolerance and inclusion will be important to reestablishing that trust. Today, exclusion is most likely to affect those who are living in areas where they are in
the ethnic minority - often the poorest. Discrimination (e.g., over hiring, access to services, or studying in a
dominant curriculum and language) and even physical violence exacerbate exclusion. Fostering participation
and inclusion is importantto reducing gaps in wellbeing. Enhancing consultation mechanisms with groups that
represent the interests of the poor (e.g., community associations, labor unions, religious groups) is key to a
successful poverty reduction strategy. Social exclusion does not affect ethnic groups only; women also risk
exclusion and discrimination. Gender concerns revolve largely around the economic and social exclusion of
displaced women, employment for single female-headed households, and the legacy of a painful heritage of
war-time rape. A number of international and local NGOs are providing programs geared towards the needs of
these women, who are often among the poor. Programs include microcredit, employment assistance, day care
and psychological counseling, among others. International and local NGOs have had active programs
supporting many other disadvantaged groups which have also provided effective vehicles for participation. The
Bank has catalyzed participatory efforts in partnership with several of these NGOs, particularly around key
economic policy issues. For example, working groups drawn from local communities and NGOs, with relevant
expertise, have developed draft laws governing non-governmental organizations and a framework of laws for
micro-credit, credit and savings institutions. A social policy task force including practitioners, academics,
policy makers and politicians is leading the dialogue on social protection reform (Annex 2). Among efforts
needed are strengthening local government accountability to the public, encouraging continued communitybased participation in social services, infrastructure and other areas, and generating dialogue on economic
policy issues.
Completing Reconstruction
33. Although the reconstruction effort overall has been highly successful, reconstruction needs will
remain for some time to come. Among the most critical areas in the medium-term will be:
H
Housing.
Significant progress has been made under programs funded by donors and through self-help.
However, the damage was vast; more than two-thirds of war-affected housing had not yet been repaired by
end-1998. Integrated programs that support rebuilding of housing and restoration of local services (targeted
largely at returnees), supported by the EU, UNHCR and others and implemented in large part through
NGOs, are likely to continue to be important. In addition to the continuing need for postwar reconstruction,
the legal issues of establishing housing rights will need to be addressed systematically (AAA undertaken
with support from the Bank's Post-Conflict Fund has reviewed needs for development of an efficient
housing market).
* Other Community Services. While community facilities have been restored in many urban areas and in
much of the Federation through donor support (including Bank-supported emergency reconstruction
projects), many people continue to receive services that are of poor quality and with limited availability.
Coverage of rural areas is less advanced, as has been progress in Republika Srpska more generally, due to
the later start of reconstruction there. Local services likely to be most sorely needed are water supply and
waste collection. Finally, while overall environmental concerns are not as serious as before the war
because of reduced economic activity (in particular BH's predominant prewar heavy industry), there are
important environmental issues at the local level, in particular in regard to waste disposal. Moreover, there
is a need to identify current and future potential environmental concerns which may arise with more
sustainable private sector activity.
* Demining. Much has been accomplished in clearing, surveying, marking and mine awareness, through the
efforts of many donors (including a Bank-funded project). However, experience of other post conflict
14

countries in Southeast Asia and Central America indicate that the challenges of demining are likely to
remain with the country for some years to come. The major challenge is to begin to substitute local
resources for donor assistance. The benefits of mine clearance are often very local, and local governments
should gradually contribute financially to clearance costs. If properly handled, such a strategy could
reinforce ownership while improving incentives for proper definition of priorities and increasing the
pressure for transparency.
IV. Economic Outlook and External Environment
34. BH's medium-term outlook is framed by its advantages and disadvantages. The experience of other
transition countries over the past decade - and experience from countries emerging from conflict demonstrates the difficulty of the challenges BH faces. The country has some advantages and disadvantages as
it confronts these challenges. Advantages that were not available to most other countries at the start of their
transition include substantial modernization of economic infrastructure through the PRRP - notably, the power,
transport and telecommunications networks. Investment needs in the coming years have been reduced without
contributing substantially to increasing the country's debt burden, since most funding has been on a grant (or
highly concessional) basis. Macroeconomic stability has been maintained, along with a strong growth
momentum. Price distortions appear relatively modest, and much of the inefficient prewar heavy industry is
already dormant or was destroyed during the war. On the other hand, BH has disadvantages which are likely to
make for an unusually difficult transition - e.g., the large number of refugees and displaced, demobilized
soldiers, and young adults with incomplete education; the political and social constraints to labor mobility;
internal and regional security issues; and the continuing task of strengthening governance and establishing the
rule of law in a postwar context. While many of these issues are also confronted by other countries in the SEE
Region, BH has perhaps among the most daunting mix of such challenges. These factors point to the urgency
of resolute and timely reforms to bring rapid transition and rising living standards for all Bosnians, as well as
the importance of a continued strong partnership with the international community.
A. Base Case Economic Scenario
35. Under a scenario of strong policy reform, sustainable growth is achievable in the medium term.
Simulations based on the assumption of continued strong macroeconomic management and good performance
in the outlined policy reform areas indicate that GDP growth would recover to 15 percent this year, and average
8 percent during 2001-2005 - a rate more normally associated with open and dynamic economies (Table 2,
Annex B6). Per capita income could exceed US$2,000 by 2005, and living standards should reach close to the
SEE Region's average. If this growth path is maintained, BH should be able to restore its pre-war level of GDP
during the latter half of the decade.
36. Economic growth and employment prospects depend on the buoyancy and efficiency of private
investment. Simulations assume that private investment increases steadily in the coming years, fueled by
privatization and improvements in the business enabling environment, including reforms of financial, tax, and
regulatory systems and the labor market. Banking sector reforms will ensure that private savings increase from
their previous low levels - albeit slowly - and are channeled into credit for private enterprise and help increase
the attractiveness of BH as a site for foreign investment. Tax and regulatory reforms will create incentives for
more efficient investment and production decisions. Labor market reforms will build flexibility into the
restructuring process and promote productive employment that will increase opportunities for BH's poorest.
However, given the impact of large scale privatization which will begin during the CAS period, the high
unemployment rate is likely to decline only slowly in the next several years. Following the initial adjustment
period - and once labor market reforms and improvements in the fiscal and business environment are made the unemploymentrate should decline more consistently over the medium term. This highlights the importance
of putting in place a sustainable social safety net in the near term.

15

Table 2: Key Economic Indicators, 1996 - 2005
Estimated
Projected
1996
1997
1998
1999*
National Accounts
GDP (US$ million)
Real GDP growth (%)
PerCapitaGDP(US$)
Investment(% of GDP)
Consumption (% of GDP)
Gross Domestic Savings (% of GDP)
Public Sector Balances
Expenditures (% of GDP)
o/w Public Investment
Revenues (% of GDP)
Deficit (-) (% of GDP)
o/w Extemal Financing (% of GDP)
Balance of Payments
Trade Balance (US$ million)
Exports(US$million)
Imports (US$ million)
Current Account Balance (US$ million)
As%ofGDP
Change in Reserves (increase=-, US$ million)
*

2000

2001

2002

2005

2741
69
658
42
117
-17

3518
30
838
41
104
-4

4054
13
959
38
99
1

4594
10
1081
33
91
9

5441
15
1274
32
88
12

6389
14
1448
32
85
15

7239
10
1678
28
83
17

9244
5
2110
25
78
22

65
24
37
-28
28

51
24
28
-23
23

53
20
33
-21
21

49
16
32
-17
17

45
13
32
-13
13

44
11
32
-12
12

41
8
32
-9
9

35
4
31
-4
4

-1546
336
1882
-748
-27
-243

-1758
575
2333
-1060
-30
-91

-1756
817
2573
-1098
-27
-85

-1430
970
2399
-763
-17
-489

-1464
1150
2622
-882
-16
-8

-1521
1410
2931
-916
-14
-50

-1353
1671
3024
-689
-10
-75

-1095
2244
3339
-355
-4
-69

Note: 1999 GDP growthof 10%(vs.forecast16%) dueto temporaryeffectsof Spring 1999Kosovocrisis.
Source: Official data, Bank and IMF staff estimates.

37. As aid flows decline there will be a sizable adjustment in the external current account. Donors have
funded large current account deficits associated with imports needed for reconstruction. Simulations assume
much of the needed adjustment will come from a decrease in imports as reconstruction-related needs continue
to decrease. This process has already begun, with the current account deficit contained at 17 percent of GDP in
1999 (compared with 27 percent in 1998), reflecting the decline in the pace of reconstruction imports and the
gradual recovery of exports. However, reforms designed to increase investment efficiency will also be needed
to offset the reduction in the overall investment level. Recurrent expenditures are expected to increase
modestly in absolute terms in line with the need to strengthen social safety nets and provide for the operation
and maintenance of new investments. Careful expenditure management and enhanced revenue performance
will be critical to ensuring both medium-term fiscal sustainability and external payments viability. Financing
requirements will consist mostly of reconstruction costs and debt service obligations during the CAS period.
Inflows of the remaining funds from the PRRP will meet a large share of BH's external financing needs in
2000-2002. However, commitment of new, albeit reduced, donor assistance will be critical to maintaining
external liquidity during the CAS period. The annual external financing requirement in 2000-2002 is estimated
at about US$800-900 million. After taking into account anticipated donor assistance, an estimated additional
US$350 million would be required during the period.
38. Export performance will be increasingly important to both output expansion and external balance.
Exports have increased very rapidly, nearly tripling from the very low postwar level in 1996. Continued strong
export growth in the coming years will depend on further re-orientation of trade towards larger and more stable
markets, including those of other countries in the SEE Region, and, in particular, Europe. BH has applied to
join the World Trade Organization (WTO) and this objective should be a priority. Moreover, preparing to take
early advantage of an SAA with the EU in the context of the Stability Pact will also be critical. Foreign direct
investment will be important in providing valuable linkages to these markets. Re-orientation towards products
more in line with BH's comparative advantage is also needed, implying diversification of exports towards
higher value-added and human capital-intensive products. The speed of re-orientation will depend on the pace
of privatization and restructuring. Containing labor costs through labor market reforms will be important to
maintaining competitiveness in light of the KM's exchange rate peg to the DM.
16

39. The debt situation has improved, however, creditworthiness remains several years away. Debt
rescheduling agreements in the last three years have brought about a significant reduction in BH's external debt,
making for relatively comfortable debt ratios. Total debt now reaches 68 percent of GDP and debt service is 8
percent of exports (Annex B7), though there is a marked difference between the Entities (debt service consumes
8 percent of budgeted expenditures in the Federation and 11 percent in Republika Srpska). Debt management
has also improved over the last two years, with technical assistance from the Bank and others. With the
establishment in 1998 of a financing mechanism for the State budget, whereby the Entities contribute in fixed
proportions on a regular basis, debt repayment performance has significantly improved. While debt service is
expected to increase starting in 2002 (reflecting increased principal repayments to international financial
institutions), under the base case scenario outlined above debt service ratios will remain healthy with continued
export growth and enhanced revenue performance. Our CAS Progress Report (August 1998) indicated that
creditworthiness was delayed and would likely be achievable only by the end of the FYOO-02period. Our
review of creditworthiness based on current circumstances indicates that there remains substantial fiscal and
export fragility, linked in large part to the slower than hoped pace of structural reform. This indicates that
while BH is on the path to creditworthiness, it remains some years away. During the next two to three years it
is critical for BH to improve the environment for private investment activity and make adjustments in its
expenditure management policies to strengthen debt-carrying capacity. Inflows of the remaining funds from the
PRRP and commitments of new donor assistance will be important to maintaining external liquidity during this
period. However, as aid-flows and concessional financing diminish, alternative sources of external finance will
be needed, and creditworthiness must be an explicit objective of the EDS. We will continue to assess progress
towards creditworthiness (and IDA graduation, para. 53) annually, including a Creditworthiness Review (FY01)
to re-evaluate BH's debt profile and vulnerability.
B. Low-Case Scenario
40. Weak reform effort and external political risks. A low case scenario is developed on the basis of the
risk of weak internal cooperation that delays reform performance (para. 59), the primary risk to both the
country's developmentobjectives and to the IDA program. In such a scenario, fiscal and private sector reforms
would be delayed, further increasing fiscal fragility and weakening the private sector supply response. Donor
financial support could also be expected to erode, further dampening growth and employment prospects and
straining social sustainability. With the current recovery itself fragile, such reversal would put at risk many
who have been able to climb out of poverty over the last several years. This sort of low case scenario could be
short-lived (less than a year) -- since both domestic social pressure and international donor pressure
(coordinated by OHR) would be likely to bring about a correction of domestic policies. However, a cycle of
weak reforms followed by corrections could be repeated over time. In such a case, the growth momentum in the
country would be expected to falter and deteriorate more substantially, with still positive but lower annual
growth rates averaging 5 percent during 2000-2005. Restoration of the prewar level of GDP would be
prolonged, as the process of transition to a market economy with a vibrant private sector would be substantially
delayed. Ability to comfortably service debt, as well as to address poverty reduction challenges, would be
reduced. A low-case scenario driven largely by external political events (e.g., deteriorating circumstances in
FRY) could have similar outcomes - or could worsen an internally-driven low case. Such scenarios would be
more difficult to mitigate. The Stability Pact is aimed at initiatives designed to help manage such risks in the
Region (para. 59).
V. The FYOO-02Country Assistance Strategy
A. Formulating the CountryAssistance Strategy
41. The FYOO-02CAS has been formulated on the basis of consultations with stakeholders in BH (para. 42).
It evolves out of, and is with consistent with, the broad thrusts of our previous CAS and builds on analytical
work and the lessons of implementation(para. 43). Discussions with other international partners on their plans
17

and programs have also contributed to developing an appropriately selective role for the Bank Group (para. 45).
Finally, the CAS also fits within the broader framework of the SEE Regional strategy paper.
42. Consultations with civil society. In addition to working closely with the government on defining the
priorities for its Economic Development Strategy and Bank support during the FYOO-02 CAS period,
consultations over the last year included a series of meetings, workshops and roundtables with representatives
of academia, the media, trade organizations, the private sector, local non-governmental and community groups,
and others. A client survey providing feedback on the Bank's activities was also conducted. A key conclusion
which emerged was the importance placed on a shared vision for the future (Box 5). Many Bosnians feel they
are not consulted about their needs or their future - by their politicians, by the international community, by their
local governments. There is a view that more input at the local level is needed to begin to establish social
consensus in the aftermath of conflict.
Box 5. The CAS Participatory Process: A Bosnian Vision of the Future

*

Europe. Most Bosniansbelieve BH's future lies with Europe, and find closer integrationwith Europe highly
motivating.Thereis concern,however,that despitethe StabilityPact,the pathto a futurelinkedto Europehas not yet
beenclearlythoughtthroughby BH's policy-makers.
* Good governance. Governancestructuresneed consolidationand public institutionsmust functionin a predictable,
transparentand efficientway. Many echoedone participant'sremarkthat "institutionsare legallydefinedbut they do
not function."There is strongdesireforcapable,professionalgovernment.
* Private initiative. Manybelievein a role for the privatesector in a prosperousfutureand feel frustrationregarding
"red tape," lack of credit and delayed privatization. (However,others long for the security of socially-owned
enterprises,and thereis lackof understandingonthe workingsof a modernmarketeconomy.)
* Socialprotection. An adequatesocial safetynet is seen as keyto an equitablefuture,andthere is an awarenessof the
vulnerabilityleft by the war andthe unsustainability
of dependenceon foreignassistance.(Butthe distinctionbetween
entitlementprogramsof the pastand a needs-basedapproachis not alwaysmade.)
* Assumingresponsibility. There is a growingawarenessof the need to take hold of the future. (However,it is not
clearthatthereis understandingof the institutionalcapacity,leadershipandchallengesthat thisentails.)
43.
The FY98-99 CAS and lessons learned. Following the broad sectoral focus of reconstruction and
recovery of the Bank's immediate postwar assistance to BH, the FY98-99 CAS aimed to help BH shift from
reconstruction toward recovery and sustainable growth. Specific objectives were: (i) strengthening the
institutions of macroeconomic management; (ii) supporting transition to a market economy; and (iii) deepening
the sustainability of reconstruction. Two adjustment programs formed the cornerstone of the program. The
first supported public finance reform (through two Public Finance Adjustment Credits (PFSAC I; FY98 and II;
FY99)), aimed at building the monetary, fiscal and trade policy institutions of economic management. The
second supported transition-oriented structural reforms (through an Enterprise and Bank Privatization
Adjustment Credit (EBPAC; FY99)), aimed at privatization of enterprises and banks and modernization of
banking. As noted (Section III), progress in achieving the objectives of the public finance reform program
supported by the Bank and others has been substantial; progress under the private sector development program
has been slower. Efforts to deepen the sustainability of reconstruction and recovery - through investment
operations in education, health, energy, transport and other sectors - have been largely successful, contributing
to increased cost recovery and sector institution building. While poverty reduction was not the explicit
objective of the last CAS, Bank support to reconstruction has contributed to a significant generalized increase
in economic activity that has helped raise incomes; and specific employment generation and micro- and SME
credit line projects helped to create jobs. Mobilizing and coordinating donor support was also an important
element of the last CAS, and substantial donor funds were raised (including to co-fund IDA-supported projects,
Annex 3). A key element of project implementation has been ensuring sound procurement and financial
management arrangements in a country with the weak governance framework of BH. Among the lessons
learned has been the importance of arrangements designed to protect Bank funds, including Procurement
Monitoring and Audit Units (PMAUs) in each Entity, tasked with reviewing all procurement under Bank18

funded projects, as well as financial management systems and training for implementation agency staff. Project
implementation,OED evaluations, QAG reviews and external input have all provided lessons which we have
built into the design of this CAS (Box 6).

*

*

Box 6. LessonsLearnedduringFY98-99
Theimportanceof ownership.Projectand policyimplementation
has beenmosteffectivein BH in thoseareas where
programprioritieshavebeen establishedjointlywith the authorities.Involvementof local stakeholders,includingthe
privatesector,local communitiesand NGOs,has improvedthe efficiencyand likelyfuture sustainabilityof projects
(e.g.,NGOpartnershipsin implementation
of-theLIP microcreditproject).
Consistent effort is needed to unlock policy actions. The experience of working on tough policy reforms in an

environmentwhere consensus (whetherbetween Federationpartners, between the Entities or among the three
constituentgroupson Statematters)is difficultto achievehas alsoproducedlessons. We have foundthat manyof the
most significantreforms(e.g.,designand issuingof the new currency,establishmentof a financingmechanismfor the
State)took far longerthanhopedto initiate. But once the hurdle of agreementwas passed,implementation
has gone
relativelysmoothly.
*

Institution-building also requires long-term commitment. Reviews of both policy-based operations (e.g., ICR for

PFSACI) andinvestmentoperations(e.g.,OED reviewof the EducationII and Deminingprojects)havedemonstrated
that institutionalreformshavebeentime-consuming,
and requirelong-termcommitment.Adequateand well-designed
technicalassistanceis essentialto ensuringprogresson institutionbuildingelementsof policyreform.
*

Policy conditionality has been effective, but must be well sequenced. An independent report by the European

StabilityInitiative(ESI), a think-tankoperatingin the SEERegion,concludedthat Bankand IMF conditionalityin the
area of economicmanagementhad been"used to good effect." However,in a situationof fragilegovernance,policy
conditionsmustbe well-designedand sequenced. A recentQAGreviewof the Bank-supportedEnterpriseand Bank
PrivatizationCredit concludedthat the project timetablewas ambitiousgiven BH's political complexities;a onetranchefirst operationfollowedby a longerdurationand more ambitioussecondprojectwas an alternativeapproach.
This lessonis beingincorporatedintothe designof the SocialSectorAdjustmentCredit(SOSAC).

44.

Portfolio implementation. During the last CAS period, portfolio implementation continued to be quite
strong - with performance indicators substantially higher than Bank-wide averages (Annex B2). Most ICRs,
OED and QAG reviews have rated projects satisfactory or better in achieving their development objectives.
There has been a slight downward trend in performance over the course of the last three years as the portfolio
has matured. This trend reflects delays in various project implementation steps and in achievement of agreed
targets due primarily to the shift from emergency to more complex policy-based operations. Recent
decentralization of financial management and procurement functions to the field, proactive supervision and
policy dialogue, planned participatory analytical work and an enhanced focus on institutions and governance in
this CAS period, are all tools that will help to mitigate the risk of further slippage in portfolio performance as
policy objectives continue to become more ambitious.
45. Donor partnerships have evolved toward more well defined roles. There is an active international
presence in BH, reflected in the successful full funding of the US$5.1 billion PRRP during the four year period
1996-1999. These very engaged partnerships involve many dozens of players with presence across a wide
range of sectors - although a dozen donors have provided more that 80 percent of the total funding (Annex 3).
At the outset of reconstruction, most donors, including the Bank, funded programs across a range of sectors
given the substantial needs. Increasingly, however, donors have become much more selective, sharpening their
focus on the basis of comparative advantage. Examples include macroeconomic policy (IMF), return of
refugees (EU and UNHCR), modernization of infrastructure (EU, EBRD, EIB, bilaterals), working directly with
the private sector (EBRD, IFC, bilaterals), and community-baseddevelopment (EU and bilaterals). Over the
past two years the Bank has played a leadership role in the economic policy and structural reform areas. The
authorities and donors have turned to the Bank (in partnership with the IMF) to continue to take the lead in
these areas.

19

46. Donor coordination should now shift increasingly to BH. The primary vehicles for donor
coordination in the past have been donor conferences - convened jointly by the Bank and the EU - sectoral task
forces and the Economic Task Force, chaired by the OHR in Sarajevo. These forums have been generally
effective means for coordinating donor programs and policy responses, in the overall context of the PRRP.
With the development of a Bosnian Economic Development Strategy as a framework for donor assistance in the
period 2000-2004, the Bosnian authorities should begin to assume a greater role in aid coordination.
Consultative Group meetings should now replace donor conferences, and the emphasis will be more on
discussion, review and monitoring of developmentstrategies, objectives and outcomes.
B. Objectives of the FYOO-02Country Assistance Strategy
47. A selective role for the Bank Group. The agenda set out in Section III is one to which all partners in
BH's development effort will contribute. Consistent with the shift away from broad sectoral coverage in the
last CAS, the World Bank Group's support under the FYOO-02CAS will continue to be selective. A reduced
budget envelope means that selectivity has even greater importance in this CAS period. We have been asked by
the authorities as well as by other key partners, to continue in the policy reform supportive role we played
during the last CAS, and which very few others can assume. Through our policy-advice role we can be helpful
in supporting BH's move to greater economic self-sufficiency, and in expanding the emphasis on postwar
growth by seeking to ensure it is inclusive, and by broadening the concept of poverty. While we will continue
to support the institution building and private sector reforms fundamental to our last CAS, in FYOO-02we have
fine-tuned the core policy agenda by adding a focus on poverty reduction and social sustainability. In tandem,
we intend to disengage over this CAS period from support to reconstruction. During the CAS period we expect
to continue to play an aid coordination role, though in a reduced way. Both the policy reform and aid
coordination roles are consistent with the broader mandate given to the Bank by the international community in
the SEE Region in the context of the Stability Pact. During this CAS period we will continue to refrain from
entering areas where we see others are taking a lead role; e.g., support for refugee return. While clearly need
remains - and many of these activities contribute to poverty reduction - we will leave such support to partners
who are already engaged, and whose comparative advantage is better matched to handle them, especially with
grant funding.
48. The overarching objective of the World Bank Group's partnership with BH is to increase economic
opportunity and improve the quality of life for all Bosnians. In light of BH's development priorities, and the
role that the World Bank Group can play in addressing these priorities, the strategic development objectives of
the FYOO-02CAS period will be (Annex B9):
*

to help strengthen BH's weak and fragmented governance arrangements by building accountable
institutions as a solid foundation for broad-based self-sustaining growth and democratic
participation;

*

to help foster sustainable and inclusive private sector-led growth and employment as the most
important means of improving economic opportunityfor all Bosnians; and

*

to help build social sustainability by establishing affordable and equitable social services for all
Bosnians, including social safety nets for the most vulnerable.

49. Poverty reduction is a cross-cutting and overarching theme of this CAS. Among the vehicles during
the CAS period to help reduce poverty will be bringing a targeted poverty reduction focus to the development
of BH's EDS, in part through the PRSP. Over the CAS period we will also prioritize efforts designed to
support growth that spurs employment (especially in SMEs) and that reduces barriers to intra-Entity activity.
Labor reforms, an improved business enabling environment, promotion of SMEs and tax harmonization are all
important vehicles to achieve this. We will also assist in building more accountable and transparent
20

institutions, help improve poverty and social sector information, strengthen governance and financing of social
services and help build financially sustainable pension systems. Developing an equitable and affordable social
protection strategy will be important to ensuring the needs of the poorest are met, especially in the context of
continued privatization. Finally, the CAS would prioritize increased participation and inclusion to help
strengthen social sustainability.
C. The Planned FYOO-02World Bank Group Program
Strengthening Institutions and Governance
50. Over the next two to three years the authorities will need to continue to build and strengthen the
institutions and policies of good governance at State, Entity and local level. Planning for fiscal adjustment will
be an important element of this challenge. During the CAS period, the specific aims of Bank Group support
will be: (i) assistance in developing and implementing an Anti-Corruption Strategy; (ii) substantially
completing tax harmonization and reform; (iii) enhancing public expenditure efficiency and management,
including a start to civil service reform; and (iv) strengthening and further defining the responsibilities of local
governments. The PFSAC program would continue to be the key policy reform instrument in this area
during the CAS period. Activities supported by the Bank Group during FYOO-02aimed at achieving these
goals would include (Annex B3, B4):15


Transparentgovernance. In the wake of criticism about alleged corruption in the use of domestic public
revenues, the authorities have requested Bank assistance to carry out a comprehensive anti-corruption
program. AAA supporting an Anti-Corruption Diagnosis and Strategy (FYOO-01)is now underway based
on a survey to determine the scale, scope and depth of corruption in public institutions. The survey will lead
to development,jointly with other donors, of a time-bound Action Plan to reform financial controls, civil
service, the judiciary, competition policy, regulatory systems and other areas (Box 7). Because of the widerangingscope of this work, and the strongpartnerships with the authorities and other donors, this will be a
primary AAA task. Several key reform measures are already supported under the ongoing PFSAC II
(including establishment of Treasuries and Supreme Audit Agencies, which will be considered a trigger for
base case lending (para. 54).) The diagnostic work will also help to define the informationbase and develop
a program of future policy reforms to be supported by a planned PFSAC III (FY02). A Financial
Management Assessment (FY01) would focus in particular on strengthening financial management of
agencies responsible for implementing Bank-funded projects.

*

Tax and revenuepolicy reform and improvements. Second tranche conditions under the PFSAC II related
to tax policy include agreement on harmonization of the locus of tax collection to reduce losses through tax
evasion and remove impediments to free flow of goods between the Entities; establishment of
administrative co-ordination between the Entity tax administrations; and rationalization of the sales taxes
rates and exemption policy in both Entities in a harmonized manner. With completion of these measures,
tax policy harmonization and reform would have been largely completed. A start to gradual reduction of
payroll taxes would also be initiated under the planned PFSAC III. A Regional Trade Facilitation project
(FY01), designed to support improved customs infrastructure and administration at border posts in BH (and
throughout the SEE Region), would help boost the efficiency of revenue collection, and would be
complementedby efforts of other donors to support establishment of a border patrol service.

*

Public expenditure efficiency. Building on the work begun under the Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) exercise, a second Public Expenditure Review (FY01) will help identify a sustainable

15Donors contributing to building governance and institutions include the IMF, the European Union, the OHR, several UN agencies,
and a number of bilateral aid agencies which provided technical assistance and other support. The Public Finance Adjustment Credits
(PFSAC l; FY98 and PFSAC II; FY99) have provided a framework for coordination of donor programs and policies in this area.
Implementationof the PFSAC II and preparation of a planned PFSAC III are expectedto continue to allow IDA to play this role.

21

level of public spending, and will be a key element in ensuring a sound fiscal adjustment strategy. The PER
will have a special focus on social services and will identify the spending cuts and choices needed to
maintain adequate levels of service delivery in the face of declining donor flows. It would also identify the
level of external assistance that BH would need for continued growth and development. The PER would
provide the policy underpinnings for reforms in civil administration, addressing fiscal and policy
accountability issues both at the local level and for the combined public sector. Policy recommendations of
the PER will be included in the reform program to be supported by the planned PFSAC III. Other
operations that would contribute to the overall objective of increased public expenditure efficiency will be a
Labor Force Redeployment project (FY00) that aims to assist demobilized soldiers in the context of Dayton
military reductions; a Transport III project (FY01) focused on road maintenance institutions and cost
recovery instruments to reduce the burden of transport maintenance on public finances; and a Mostar Water
project (FY00) which would improve operational efficiency of water services (and promote collaboration
between the two Federation partners).
Box 7. Workingin PartnershipTowardsGreaterTransparency
Buildingon a strategydevelopedby OHRand TransparencyInternational,the Anti-CorruptionDiagnosisand Strategy
will startwith detailedsurveysadministered
to publicofficials,enterprisemanagersand ordinarypeopleto identifyinstitutions
mostat riskandprioritiesforreform.Thisparticipatoryapproachshouldhelpfacilitateexpansionof the scale,scopeand depth
of publicsectorreform,particularlyin the areas of financialcontrol,civil service,legal/judicialand regulatorysystemsand
competitionpolicy. Buildingon considerablework alreadyunderwayby various internationalfinancialinstitutionsand
partners(the Bank,IMF,the US,the EU, EBRD,OHR,OSCEand others),and consistentwith the SEE RegionalStability
PactAnti-Corruption
Initiative(SPAI),severalprioritieshavebeendefined:
*

Establishing Border Control and Strengthening Customs Administration. Evasion of custom duties and taxes due to
smuggling through uncontrolled borders and illegal sale of goods denies resources to the Entity budgets. Building on

*

EU-CAFAOsuccessin strengtheningcustomsadministration,the legislativeand institutionalframeworkfor border
policeandmore effectivecustomsadministration
needto be established.
Reform of PaymentsBureau. Lack of fiscal and financialtransparencyin public sector operationsis fostered by
paymentbureausthat have combineda wide range of functions(tax collection,accountingand treasury services,
bankingand informationprocessing).A comprehensive
reformprogramwilldismantlethe paymentsbureausystemby

*

transferring its individual functions to public or private sector institutions where such functions are normally
undertaken.
Greater Accountability in Public Expenditure Management. The reform program supported by the Bank (PFSAC 11)
and others includes: introductionof independent external audit institutions and effective Treasury functions at State and
Entity levels, and more realistic and consultativebudget planning consistent with macroeconomic and sectoral policies
and integratingexternally provided resources, through a Medium-TermExpenditure Framework(MTEF) exercise.

*

Greater Transparency in the Operations of Publicly-Owned Enterprises and Utilities. Lack of transparencyin

companiesraisesconcernsabout their privilegedmarketpositionsupportedby
financialoperationsof publicly-owned
influentialinterest groups. One of the major concernsis that the financialoperationsof these companies(e.g.,
electricity,telecommunicationsand banks) are being manipulatedto transfer funds for non-businesspurposes.
Promotion of competition, transparent privatization and introduction of better administrative and accounting practices
are key actions being supported by a variety of donors, includingthe Bank.

*

Reforming intergovernmentalfinance and strengthening local governments. The appropriateness of
current revenue and expenditure assignments would be reviewed through a Local Government Finance
Study (FY01), which would make specific recommendations for reforms regarding inter-regional equity
issues which could then be supported under the planned PFSAC III. The study would be designed to
include a focus on informal institutional and human capital issues. A planned community-drivenMunicipal
Services project to provide infrastructure and other services in rural areas (FY02) would also help
strengthen local government capacity. An Environment Infrastructure project (FY02) would address the
problem of waste management by assisting municipalities in managing solid waste disposal, which
deteriorated significantly after the war.

22

Fostering Private Sector-Led Growth and Employment
51. Over the next two to three years, BH must ensure sustainable growth and employment by fostering the
conditions for private sector investment in an increasingly open and transparent market economy that is
preparing itself for gradual integration with European institutions. IFC, MIGA, FIAS and the Bank have
worked closely to ensure the Bank Group's private sector development strategy reflects synergies among, and
builds on the comparative advantages of, the respective institutions. Specific objectives of Bank Group support
during the CAS period will be: (i) improving the business enabling environment; (ii) completion of small-scale
privatization and a significant start to divestiture of large scale firms and banks; (iii) promoting development of
SMEs; (iv) reform of labor market legislation; and (v) continued reform and promotion of strategic foreign
investors in the banking sector, along with completion of payment bureau reform. The ongoing Enterprise and
Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit (FY99), a planned Business Environment Adjustment Credit (FYO1)
and a planned Privatization Technical Assistance Credit (FYOI) would be key instruments during the CAS
period. Activities supported by the Bank Group during FYOO-02will include (Annex B3, B4): 16
*

Enabling environment. A study aimed at identifying the specific administrative barriers to foreign and
domestic private investment, and developing a time-bound Action Plan for reform of business legislation
and policies will be conducted by FIAS in collaboration with a local counterpart team (FY01). The process
of designing an Action Plan and identifying priorities would be conducted in consultation with various
stakeholders at State and Entity level, as well as the business community and donors. A planned Business
Environment Adjustment Credit (BAC; FY01) will support recommended reforms under the Action Plan
and would be likely to include, among other measures, simplifying the business registration process,
reducing the tax burden for businesses and rendering the tax system fair and transparent; and strengthening
the court system and enforceability of laws and regulations. Recommendations would be consistent with
the framework developed under the Investment Compact for the SEE Region. The Action Plan is expected
to serve as a platform for a coordinated, coherent effort to improve the business enabling environment, with
partnership among the authorities, the business community and key donors, including EBRD and several
bilaterals. The work of the Balkan Enterprise Facility (BEF) on identifying and reducing barriers specific
to SMEs will also be incorporated (Box 8), as will input from MIGA which is playing an active role in
facilitating foreign investment. Because of the importance of this effort to BH's overall development
objectives, the partnerships with others and within the Bank Group, this would be one of the main AAA
tasks of the CASperiod. In addition, ongoing efforts provide political risk guarantee instruments (e.g., an
IDA-funded Enterprise Export Facility and a MIGA guarantee facility with EU funding).

-

Privatization. Progress towards SME privatization and preparation of bank and large-scale divestiture has
been supported through the ongoing Enterprise and Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit (EBPAC; FY99).
During the CAS period, satisfactoryprogress on privatization will be considered a key test of willingness to
reform, and is included as a trigger for base case lending (para. 54). Specific lending operations to support
a more aggressive pace for transferring ownership to the private sector would include a Technical
Assistance Credit for Accelerated Privatization (TACAP; FY01) to support intemational experts to work
with the privatization agencies to sell an agreed list of large scale enterprises in a transparent and
accountable fashion to strategic investors. The aim would be to divest from state ownership some 100 large
scale firms in the Federation and 30 firms in Republika Srpska during the CAS period. A privatization
eduction/awareness effort would also be included, and this operation would be closely coordinated with
privatization technical assistance provided by other donors. Review of severance policies under the
privatization program would also be undertaken, and linked to reforms to be supported under the planned
SOSAC II (para. 52). The planned BAC, to be prepared in parallel, would support completion of SME

16
There are a number of donors who are also contributing to private sector development, including the IMF, the European Union,
EBRD, and a number of bilateral aid agencies which provided technical assistance and other support. These efforts are broadly
coordinated through a private sector development task force in Sarajevo, and the Bank-supported Enterprise and Bank Privatization
Adjustment Credit (EBPSAC; FY99) has provided a framework for coordination of technical assistance and policy advice.

23

privatization, among other measures (above). It is expected that preparation work for a second Enterprise
and Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit (EBPAC II), supporting continuation of large-scale privatization,
would begin during this CAS period (but not be delivered until FY03). The reform program supported by
the Bank aims also at privatizing the power and telecommunication utility companies. Satisfactory
electricity and telecommunication laws, setting the stage for appropriate regulatory environments and costbased tariffs, will be supported under a planned Power III (FY00), and under EBRD's support to reforms in
the telecommunication sector. In parallel, the Bank intends to advise the Entity governments on attracting
strategic investors to these sectors under the TACAP.
*

SMEs. A Balkan Enterprise Facility (BEF; FY00), based in Sarajevo, will help private SMEs structure and
implement investments, train and upgrade SME management and provide them with technical assistance,

under a new IFC program being piloted in BH and Vietnam (Box 8). Previous donor-funded credit lines for
privately-owned SMEs, onlent through the domestic banking system, have been efficiently used and, given
continuing need, could be supported on a limited scale through a planned Second Enterprise Credit Line
(FY00) in Republika Srpska while banking sector reforms are underway (see below). IFC will continue to
focus on investments in sectors where BH has a comparative advantage (including forestry, under an
ongoing Wood Agency Line). Successful direct IFC investment in recently privatized companies has
spurred new investments to modernize the pharmaceutical and meat processing industries; hotel projects are
also being explored. IFC has completed a survey of light industry and food-processing, and has identified
potential projects in these sectors. Fostering private sector activity in agriculture would be among elements
supported under a planned Agriculture II project (FY02).
Box 8. The Balkan Enterprise Facility: Promoting SMEs in the Region
The Balkan Enterprise Facility (BEF) aims to assist in the development of the private sector in the SEE Region. The
private sector in many of the countries of the Region is predominantly comprised of small and medium size enterprises
(SMEs), which are expected to be the driving force for sustainable income and employmentgrowth in the Region. While it
will be important to ensure adequate SME financing products and vehicles, equally important will be removing constraints
in the overall business environment, building managerial and technical skills, and providing access to knowledge and
information. The BEF has several core and closely complementary programs aimed at addressing these constraints in a
coordinated manner. The BEF's objectives are to provide:
.

Support for private sector companies to structure and implementinvestment projects, and support for financial agencies
to monitor and supervise private sector loans and investments;

*
.

Assistance and advice to address continuingconstraints in the business enabling environment;
Training and education programs aimed at upgrading the management and professional skills of personnel in
companies, financial agencies and domestic consultant organizations; and
Inputs to generate, collect, analyze and disseminate informationand knowledgerelevant to the private sector.

*

* Labor market reform. Dialogue during FY00 has focused on reform of Entity labor legislation to provide
greater flexibility, reduce costly obligations to firms and ease discretionary government controls. Reform
of labor market legislation would be supported under a first Social Sector Adjustment Credit, with an
accompanyingtechnical assistance credit (SOSAC I; FY00). A labor market study (FY01) is underway and
will look at the trade-offs in labor market policy needed in order to generate productive employment
opportunities, including encouraging part-time work which may help address the specific employment
needs of single female heads of household. We would continue to work closely with ILO and other donor
partners on ensuring sound labor standards.
*

Banking. Completion of payments bureau reforms (supported under the ongoing EBPAC, in collaboration
with the IMF) is a key priority linked to increased transparency and building the confidence of investors.
Improved banking supervision, also supported under the EBPAC, is an important objective. IFC is
attempting to attract international banking partners to BH and to introduce modem banking practices. The
BEF will provide support for financial agencies to monitor and supervise private sector loans and

24

investments. In the context of a planned CEM (FY02), an enterprise and bank survey would evaluate the
financial health of medium and large scale enterprises and banks.
Building Social Sustainability
52. Over the next several years the objective will be to develop the analytical basis for a full poverty
reduction strategy, and improve the sustainability, effectiveness and equity of social services and social safety
nets. The objectives of Bank Group support during the CAS period will be helping to: (i) improve poverty
information to better understand the nature, extent and characteristics of poverty (and building local
institutional capacity to manage this information); (ii) establish the framework for a more equitable social
protection system within a tight overall fiscal spending envelope; (iii) reorient social services more broadly to
the needs of a market economy; (iv) develop strategies and policies to promote inclusion, through improved
dissemination of public information, community-based activities and strengthening BH's growing local NGO
sector; and (v) begin an assessment of environmental issues. A planned program of Social Sector Adjustment
Credits would be the key policy-based instrumentsfor achieving these objectives. Activities supported by the
Bank Group during FYOO-02would include (Annex B3, B4):17
*

Poverty information, capacity building and strategy. As a key first step in building poverty data, a Living
Standards Measurement Survey (FY01) has been launched - supported under the Education III project
(FY00). On the basis of this work, a Poverty Assessment (FY02) is planned, which will also include an
assessment of the social dimensions of poverty. The Poverty Assessment will help to provide the analytical
tools and capacity required for the preparation of BH's first full PRSP.'8 Because of the importance of this
effort to BH's development objectives, the partnerships and participatory nature of the work, this will be
a key AAA task during the CAS period. Collection of data and qualitative information will examine
regional disparities and will also target the specific status and needs of women in BH's post-conflict
environment as well as children and youth. The status of the internally displaced would be another focus;
emphasis would also be placed on gathering data on urban and rural poverty. In parallel, a small IDF grant
(FY00) aims at helping to strengthen the capacity of the Statistics Institutes more generally.

*

Social protection. A planned first Social Sector Adjustment Credit (SOSAC; FY00) is the first step in
supporting a comprehensive program of reform in the social sectors. It would aim in the first instance to
develop clear social protection strategies for each Entity, and support enhance,' apacity to generate social
sector statistics, in addition to ensuring that benefits for retrenched worker-, reflect available resources
through its primary emphasis on reform of Entity labor legislation (para. 51). The SOSAC would be
designed to have a small accompanying technical assistance credit to support implementation of institutionbuilding policy reforms. The Public Expenditure Review (FY01) would have a special focus on social
protection issues, and would help further refine policy options related to social protection spending choices.
This would provide an important baseline for monitoring the relative importance of different transfer
programs over the CAS period. Policy measures would be supported under a planned follow-up SOSAC II
(FY02), which would support implementation of social protection strategies through reforms to the overall
structure of cash transfer programs, improved financing mechanisms for social assistance, and overhauling
other transfer programs such as veterans' benefits, disability programs and unemployment insurance.
Reform of the Entity pension systems is supported under the ongoing public finance program. A small
Social Insurance Technical Assistance Credit (FY01) would support investments needed to develop
information systems, train pension fund staff in improved management of pension systems and ensure

17 Donors contributing to poverty-alleviation programs and policies include the IMF, the European Union, several UN agencies, and a
number of bilateral aid agencies which have provided both direct social assistance and technical assistance to the Entity governments. A
social protection task force in Sarajevo includes representativesof involved donor agencies and the Entity governments and has provided
a vehicle for coordination of assistance and policies.
Is A Poverty and Inequality Note (FYOO)based on existing data will help inform the I-PRSP, which is currently being developed by an
interdisciplinaryteam in BH.

25

public dissemination of information to improve accountability. (The project would support a similar
component in health care.)
*

Education. Governance and finance reforms, and selected capacity-building/vocationaleducation initiatives
will be pursued through an Education III project (FY00). A shared-Entity Standards and Assessment
Agency has recently been approved, as part of project preparations, representing significant political
acceptance of the need to reduce ethnically-driven politicization of education and focus attention on
European compatibility and integration. The project will also support a similar Coordinating Board to
focus on mutual accreditation and improved management in higher education, as well as shared information
systems for all education levels. A Global Distance Learning Center in Sarajevo (FY01), with WBI
support, is also planned, as is a Global Development Gateway project (FY01), which aims to offer a variety
of stakeholders access to the global knowledge network, including online training and other resources.

*

Health. Building on substantial progress over the last two years in passing new health insurance laws, a
planned Social Insurance Technical Assistance Credit (FY01) would provide investment support for health
insurance to be able to respond to new demands created by postwar decentralization. It will also support
building capacity and creating transparent and informed decision making, as well as public dissemination of
health care information to improve accountability of the health care sector. (The project would support
similar efforts in pension reform.)

*

Inclusion. Promoting voice and inclusion will be important to beginning to restore civic and social ties so
badly damaged during the war, and developing sound relationships between state, market and civil society.
Supporting community-focused activities, such as small infrastructure or microcredit projects is an
important way in which the Bank can support this objective. During the FYOO-02CAS, a planned Local
Initiatives II (microcredit) project (FYOI) and a Municipal Services project (FY02) would follow up on
ongoing microcredit and local and municipal development operations. As part of this support, we will help
strengthen and make more sustainable the framework in which the NGO sector operates. More generally,
we intend to assist the government in developing mechanisms for consulting with stakeholders in a more
systematic way, through consultative AAA activities (e.g., the LSMS/Poverty Assessment, the
Anticorruption Diagnosis, the FIAS study of administrative barriers and others). Capitalizing on
information technology is further way in which the Bank can help build social inclusion. The planned SEE
region Gateway and Global Distance Learning Facilities based in BH will help support this objective.
Mainstreaming of participation to the extent feasible in BH is likely to help de-politicize many issues and
may provide a framework for moving forward on reform (e.g. in education, the focus on developing
European standards and student assessment information has helped re-focus public attention away from
ethnic politics). A small IDF grant to pilot reconciliation activities (FY01) is also planned. These efforts
would be consistent with the ongoing SEE Social Development Initiative which aims to support social
cohesion and stability throughout the Region. In terms of gender, the ongoing LIP (microcredit) project has
targeted women clients, and the LIP II may be structured with the same focus - though generally we believe
that many other partners are providing support targeted at the specific post-war needs of women in BH
(para. 32).

*

Environment. An Environmental Action Plan, supported by an IDF grant (FY01), will identify and
prioritize environmental issues facing BH - which have not to date received the attention needed due to the
urgency of postwar reconstruction - as well as prepare recommendations for key investment needs to
address the identified issues. The EAP will enable the Bank to assist BH in meeting regional and global
environmental objectives, and will help ensure mainstreaming of environmental concerns into sector
projects. The EAP may identify opportunities for the Global Environment Facility (GEF) funded projects.

26

D. IDA Lending Levels and Triggers
53. IDA availability will diminish to more normal levels. At the time of the last CAS, the Board endorsed
an additional IDA authorization of US$120 million for BH, beyond the US$400 million authorized at the time
of membership. These exceptional IDA amounts have been justified on the basis of BH's extraordinary postconflict circumstances, continued strong macroeconomic performance, good progress on reconstruction and
demonstrated ability to absorb these resources, and the fact that achieving creditworthiness has taken longer
than originally anticipated (para. 39). These exceptional resources have helped complete a highly successful
reconstruction effort and given critical impetus to the program of institutional and structural reforms needed to
achieve sustainable and inclusive growth. In our Progress Report (August 1998), we noted that although BH
was approaching the IDA per-capita threshold, we expected the country to continue to be an IDA borrower
during the IDA12 period. However, it is clear that extraordinary IDA levels cannot be sustained. BH's IDA
allocation must be brought down to a performance-based level which is consistent with other IDA borrowers,
with per capita lending within range of other IDA recipients. Nevertheless, as BH shifts from completing
donor-led reconstruction to a sustained policy reform effort in the context of its own development strategy,
sufficient IDA resources are required for the Bank to continue to effectively and credibly play the policy
reform-supportiverole that both the authorities and donors look to it to provide. Thus, a gradual phasing down
over the course of this CAS period, reaching normal levels at the outset of the next CAS in FY03, is warranted.
The overall IDA envelope for the three-year CAS period is up to US$300 million under the higher range of the
base case.
54. Proposed triggers for lending. Triggers for a base case IDA program, corresponding to the base
(expected) case scenario set out in Section III (paras. 35-39), would include benchmarks regarding macro
performance, progress on structural reforms, and program implementation (Table 3). Because of the
importance of demonstrating increased commitment to reforms, minimum base case conditions have been set
to include: (i) remaining on track with the IMF-supportedprogram; (ii) making satisfactory progress on
privatization reforms (under the ongoing EBPAC); and (iii) making satisfactory progress on governance
reforms (under PFSAC II). In particular, satisfactory progress regarding the pace of both bank and enterprise
privatization will be considered tests of the authorities' commitment to the broader program of structural
reforms. Satisfactory progress establishing and putting into operation modem Treasuries and Supreme Audit
Institutions would also be triggers to gauge commitment on govemance-related reforms. Ensuring satisfactory
performance in both these areas would be a pre-condition for the base case, and for any adjustment lending
during the period.
55. The lending program continues the strong policy focus. During CAS discussions, the lending
program was reviewed with the authorities and would include the following (Annex B3):19
* Adjustment lending. It is proposed that up to about 50 percent of IDA resources over the period be
deployed as adjustment lending in support of the three main policy reform priorities outlined. Specific
operations would include a first, and planned second, Social Sector Adjustment Credit (para. 52), the
Business Environment Adjustment Credit (para. 51), and a third Public Finance Adjustment Credit (para.
50). Building on lessons in previous adjustment credits - which, among others, have indicated the
importance of adequate technical assistance and capacity building to ensure that policy objectives are
implemented - small technical assistance credits would likely be associated with some or all of the
proposed adjustment credits.
*

Investment lending. Operations would be supported based on the extent to which project objectives focus
on institution-building and strengthening of govemance, promoting private sector development, direct
poverty alleviation and participation, and/or are important from a SEE Regional perspective.

19 Credits would continue to be made through the State and passed on to the Entities through subsidiary credit agreements.

27

Project-SpecificTriggerse

Table 3. Lendin Triggers
MinimumBase Case
Conditions

FOR LOW RANGE OF BASE CASE:
*
Minimum base case conditions, plus:
*
SOSAC I (FY00): Satisfactory labor legislation amendments
approved by Parliament, draft social protection strategies, and
*
progress beginning social statistics reform.
* BAC (FY01): Implementationof FIAS Action Plan (e.g.,
*
bankruptcy legislation, simplifying business registration and
licensing) and completion of SME privatization.
FOR HIGH RANGE OF BASE CASE:
Low range base case conditions, and satisfactory progress on
enterprise (both large and SME) and bank privatization, plus:
* SOSAC 11(FY01): Closing of SOSAC 1,with passage and
implementation of satisfactory labor legislation. Satisfactory
performance on social statistics reform implementation;ongoing
implementation of social protection expenditure policy
*
framework.
* PFSAC Ill (FY02): Completion of conditions under PFSAC II.
Agreement on plan and timetable for civil service reform and
payroll tax reductions; additional measures supporting
transparency

in public expenditure

Satisfactoryproject
implementation (no significant
deterioration)
Satisfactoryperformance under
SBA/PRGF
Satisfactory performance under
the privatization program, (i.e.,
in the Federation, good progress
toward divestitureof 50% of
SMEs (about 150) and five
banks; and in RS, good progress
toward divestiture of 30% of
SMEs (about 50) and three
banks)
Satisfactoryperformance under
the public finance reform
program (i.e., establishment of
Treasuries; and Supreme Audit
Agencies)

i

Low Case

Macroeconomic
policy and
performance
slippage (e.g.,
slippage from
SBA/PRGF)
*
Extended delays
in meeting
privatization and
public finance
reform program
conditions set out in
the base case.
*

management.

56. Proposed lending under the base case. IDA's lending response would depend on the government's
policy reform commitment. Under the base case, lending could range from about US$165 million (lower range)
to about US$300 million (higher range) in support of up to about five operations per year. Amounts within
these ranges would be linked to the pace of progress toward reforms. At the lower range of the base case our
program would support about twelve or thirteen investment projects over three years (or about four operations
per year), plus up to two adjustment operations addressing social sector reforms and reform of the business
enabling environment (Table 4). In the higher range of the base case, we would support these operations plus
an additional two adjustment operations, in support of further development of the social safety net and
expanded public finance management reforms. The number of operations would depend on the ability of the
authorities to meet policy reform conditionality for individual adjustment operations. In light of the importance
of sustainable growth and employment to the overall objective of poverty reduction, conditionality under each
of the proposed adjustment operations would include reform measures important to stimulating private sector
led growth.
Table 4. Lending and Major AAA Under Base and Low Cases
Base Case
Lending

Major AAA

20

Adiustment Lending:
Social Sector Adjustment Credit
(SOSAC) II
Public Finance Adjustment
Credit (PFSAC) IIl

Lower Range
Low caseplus:
Investment Lending:
RS Line of Credit II, Privatization
TA
Adiustment Lending:
Social Sector Adjustment
(SOSAC) I
Business Environment
Adjustment Credit (BAC)

Investment Lending:20
Power III, Education 111,Mostar
Water, Emergency Labor
Redeployment, Trade Facilitation,
Local Initiatives 11,Pension/Health
TA, Environmental Infrastructure,
Municipal Services,Agriculture 111,
Transport III

Base case lower range plus:
Local GovernmentFinance
Study

Low caseplus:
FIAS Barriers Study
Public Expenditure Review

TA for EDS and I-PRSP/PRSP
LSMS and Poverty Assessment
Anti-Corruption Diagnosis /Strategy

Country

Environmental

Higher Range
Base case lower rangeplus:

Economic

Memorandum

Low Case

Action Plan

Subject to minor modification, depending on evolving priorities. Five investment operations are planned for FY00.

28

57. Proposed lending under the low case. On the other hand, poorer performance consistent with the low
case in Section III (para. 40) would be likely to trigger slippage from the IMF-supported program and/or from
the conditionality under the EPBAC and PFSAC II. In this case, we would support a smaller sub-set of the
proposed investment operations only (about three operations per year) focusing on poverty reduction,
institution-building,strengthening of governance and participation, reaching about US$150 million over three
years.
58. Monitoring of key reforms. While lending triggers will serve as key monitoring indicators during the
CAS period, we will also monitor overall policy outcomes in the three key reform areas (Table 5). Key policy
outcomes to be achieved during the course of the FYOO-02period, with the support of the IDA lending and
AAA program, are defined with greater specificity for measures supported by ongoing projects; analytical work
remains to be done and will enhance specificity for measure supported under planned operations.
Table 5. Key Reforms to be Achieved Under Base and Low Cases
Base Case
Higher Range
Lower Range
Base Case Lower Rangeplus:
Governance/
Institution
Building

Low Case plus:

Low Case

Development of EDS and 1PRSP/PRSP, plus:
Medium Term Expenditure
Framework
Sectoral capacity building
Public utility cost recovery
Demobilization targets

Start to civil service reform
Reduction of payroll tax
Continued implementationof
Anti-Corruption Action Plan
Continued reform of tax
administrationand public
expenditure management
Private Sector Led Completion of SME
Growth
privatization
Progress on large scale
privatization (100 enterprises
in Fed., 30 in RS)
Continued implementationof
FIAS Action Plan

Completion of tax policy harmonization
Establishment of Audit Agencies and
Treasuries
Implementationof Anti-Corruption Action
Plan: (e.g. improved customs border control,
reform of payment bureaus)
Progress on SME privatization (50% in Fed.,
30% in RS)
Implementationof FIAS Action Plan (e.g.
legislation on bankruptcy,reform of business
registering processes)
Progress on divestiture of State banks

Increased transparency in
public utilities (energy sector
law and regulations)

Social
Sustainability

Reform of labor legislation
Development of social protection policy
framework
Continued improvementof social sector
statistics and capacity
Reform of health insurance and
reorganziationof pension system

Improvement of poverty data
and management capacity
Education governance and
finance reforms
Pension and health care
statistics management

Implementationof social
protection expenditure
framework

VI. Country Program Risks and Monitoring
59. Risks. There are two primary risks during this CAS period, one related to internal circumstances and the
second to external developments. The internal risk factors are likely to pose the most critical risk to recovery
during the CAS period.
Internal risks: willingness and ability to move forward on the reform agenda. Fragmented governance
and the tendency of the parties to work towards independent objectives has stymied progress in the past,
and is the key risk to both the country's development agenda as well as the Bank's FYOO-02program.
Experience of the past four years indicates that months of gridlock were followed by periods of more
resolute progress once an important bottleneck had been resolved. This sort of scenario seems the most
likely for the coming CAS period. Fall elections remain an unknown which could have an important impact
on the pace of policy reform (e.g., more nationalist leaning parties, in particular in Republika Srpska, would
result in less productive cooperation between the Entities and in State-wide institutions. This could result
in policy slippages in key areas, including slow-down of the privatization program, slippages on
29

harmonization of Entity tax policies, delays in improving the private sector enabling environment, and/or
lack of progress on streamlining public spending. All of these delays would affect the pace of recovery,
and the effectiveness of poverty reduction measures. Slow progress on reforms also, in turn, affects donor
willingness to support BH's continued economic development. The Bank's strategy is designed to mitigate
these risks through a graduated lending response which sets defined triggers for both the lower and higher
ranges of the base case. The preparation of the EDS, the PRSP and other key participatory AAA vehicles
will also help mitigate this risk by enhancing dialogue and ownership of key reforms.
*

External risks: instability in the SEE Region dampens the supply response. The major external
downside risk is the potential impact of continuing regional political insecurity, particularly related to
internal political developments in FRY. If the political situation in FRY does not change (or if it
deteriorates), the perception of risk may affect private sector activity. With any substantial worsening of
regional political uncertainty (e.g., further conflict in the Region), domestic policy reform measures might
not be sufficient to offset this political risk and avoid jeopardizing foreign private investment and the
sustainability of the supply response. We consider this risk somewhat reduced at this stage, since the
Stability Pact framework has created a potentially more stable context for regional development. On the
other hand, a change within FRY towards more market-oriented government and greater political stability
would in fact have an enormous upside in terms of the potential for growth and development - both in the
Region and for BH specifically - stemming from reduced political risk, greater attractiveness of the Region
for private investment, and FRY's potential to be an engine of growth and a market for BH's goods.

60. Monitoring. The poor quality of data (in particular poverty and social data) hinders establishment of
meaningful country performance indicators at this stage. As part of the EDS and the PRSP, country
performance goals and indicators will be developed as better data becomes available through various initiatives
to strengthen baseline statistics and data gathering and management capacity. In parallel, we will seek to
develop a framework for evaluating Bank performance in relation to the primary CAS objectives by monitoring
a core group of policy outcomes (Table 5 and Annex B9). We have also retrofitted ongoing investment
operations with performance monitoring indicators, and intend to develop a scorecard for use during the CAS
period. A CAS Update will be prepared in FY01. In addition, we have undertaken a client survey, and will
continue to use survey tools to periodically evaluate performance from the clients' perspective, and make
adjustments as needed in our assistance program. We will continue to closely monitor portfolio performance
indicators for IDA-funded projects, through CPPRs, QAG reviews, OED evaluations and other external
reviews. Finally, we will continue to seek feedback from a broad range of stakeholders within civil society,
including the groups with which we have discussed this CAS over the last year, to gauge how well we are doing
and make any needed mid-course corrections.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

by Sven Sandstrom
Managing Director

Washington, DC
April 25, 2000
Attachments

30

Annex I
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Summary of the Achievements of the 1996-1999 Priority Reconstruction
and Recovery Program'

Objectives: The 1996-1999 Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program (PRRP), was prepared as
a collaborative effort by the Bank, the IMF, the EBRD and others, in close collaboration with the
authorities, as a coherent framework for postwar donor support (similar to the Comprehensive
Development Framework (CDF)). Setting out an external financing requirement of $5.1 billion,2 the
program was designed to reconstruct war-damagedphysical assets, jump-start economic recovery, and
begin policy reforms needed for sustainable growth. It was clear that rebuilding BH's inefficient
heavy industry-based economic structure was not desirable. The objective was to restore prewar
service availability levels, and regain prewar GDP by taking reforms needed for a market based
economy.
Main Achievements:Four years after the start of the program, the funding has been fully pledged,
and an estimated US$3.5 billion has been spent on achieving a great deal in a short time.
*

Reconstruction (58 percent offunding): Repair of network infrastructure is well advanced, and
community and social services in urban areas have been largely rebuilt. Over 90 percent of the
main road network is in fair to good condition, power generation has returned to nearly 80 percent
the prewar level, water supply reaches nearly 90 percent of the prewar level, and telecom line
penetration is higher than in many neighboring countries. Education and health facilities have
been largely rebuilt and supplies and equipment provided. However due to the severity of the
damage, significant needs remain in housing, solid waste, and demining.

*

Economic Recovery (18 percent offunding). To catalyze economic activity immediately after the
war to provide employment and incomes while more medium-term reform measures were being
taken, lines of credit for working capital extended to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
and entrepreneurs boosted activity of private service and light industry enterprises, political risk
insurance helped attract private foreign capital, temporary and permanent employment programs
helped provide incomes and agricultural production has recovered for the major food crops.

-

Institution-Building and Support to Government (16 percent of funding, of which half in direct
budget support). Programs were successful in supporting strengthening new State and Entity
institutions and framing macro and structural policy reform measures, rebuilding government
buildings, and providing support for social programs. Implementation of reforms aimed at
transition to a market economy have been slower, however.

*

"Peace Implementation"(8 percent offunding). Support for an independent media, transparent
elections, human rights and increased local security have been essential to facilitating an
environment where physical reconstruction could take place effectively.

A full assessment of reconstruction program achievements can be found in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Review of the Priority

Reconstruction
ProgramandLookingAheadTowardsSustainableEconomicDevelopment,May1999.
2

Estimates of destruction of productive capacity range from four to ten or more times this amount.

Annex 2
Bank Support to Encouraging Participation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
1.
Nurturing social reconstruction following war's end has been perhaps a more daunting task than
the challenge of physical reconstruction. Sponsoring dialogue within and between the three constituent
groups, focused on community- and state-building, has been and remains a critical element of the thirty
operations supported by the Bank over the past four years. These efforts contribute over time to greater
institutional and social sustainability, and build capacity for reconciliation. To the extent that
stakeholders include the poor, these effort also contribute to poverty reduction objectives.
2.
Assisting a variety of stakeholders find their own voice has also been an important part of this
process. A first mechanism the Bank has employed to support participation has been a small grants
program launched in 1998. A number of NGO programs, conferences and roundtables have been
assisted. These include, for example, a counseling program for entrepreneurial women, a conference for
the elderly, an investment forum in Tuzla, a public campaign on the role of local NGO's, a training
program to support the needs of blind people in the Republika Srpska and assistance in formulating a
national environment action plan.
3.
A second mechanisms has been the establishment of working groups has often facilitated the
consultative process, with and between NGO's and community groups, in the advancement of targeted
actions or reforms. Notable among these was a working group comprising NGO's and community groups
operating over the 1998-99 period which resulted in the development of draft laws to govern nongovernmental organizations and foundations within the country. It is expected that these laws will be
presented to both State and Entity parliaments. Another working group operating over a similar period,
comprising NGO stakeholders and local and international legal experts, led to a matrix of
recommendations in the development of the legal framework underpinning micro-credit organizations,
credit and savings associations and savings banks. Recently legislation governing micro-credit
organizations has been adopted by the parliament in the Federation BH (House of People). Following a
1997 conference co-chaired by the EC and the Bank on the social challenges facing the country, a social
policy task force co-chaired by the assistant ministers responsible for social assistance, of both Entities
with broad membership drawn from NGO's (local and international), academia, practitioners and policy
makers, was establishedto manage the ongoing dialogue on social sector reforms.
4.
A third mechanism for increasing participation are vehicles for receiving client feedback. It is
important for the Bank to listen and as required provide input and feedback to various stakeholder
organizations, through representation or observer status on the consultative bodies of such groups.
Notable participation to date is on the NGO Council, the Coordination Group on Economic and Social
Rights, (part of the Human Rights Task Force, headed by the OHR) and the Coalition for Equal
Opportunities for Disabled people.
5.
The Bank has a wide variety of international and local partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
complexity of participation in the process of nation building will need continued sensitive management,
particularly in helping the authorities develop their interim and full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) over the CAS period, if Bank assistance is to be properly targeted, playing to our strengths and
ensuring a clear understanding of client needs. In laying the foundations for a systematic process of
consultation and participation in the PRSP, as well as for the range of other AAA work planned, a
stakeholder analysis and pilot consultation with a number of different community groups (both urban and
rural) is currently being considered by the inter-Entity coordination team tasked to oversee the
development of the I-PRSP. This will then form the basis of a more comprehensive consultation and
monitoring mechanism with key stakeholders.

Annex 3
Coordination and Partnerships in Bosnia and Herzegovina'

There is an active international presence in BH, and very engaged partnerships involve many
dozens of players across a wide range of sectors (pages 2-3). Many of these multilateral, NGO and
bilateral partners were active in BH even before the war ended. In addition to the OHR and the other
international agencies set up to oversee the effective civilian implementation of the Dayton Agreement,
there are some 20 or more multilateral development agencies (including the range of UN agencies and
affiliated organizations, EBRD, the EIB, and the IMF, among others), and over 40 bilateral donors (page
4). An extensive network of several hundred local and international NGOs has also been very active in
implementing projects and providing services, particularly humanitarian support and social services. The
private sector is also becoming an increasingly important - though still smaller than needed - partner in
development initiatives.
Immediately following the end of the war, the international community endorsed a Three- to FourYear Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program (PRRP), prepared by the Bank, the IMF, the EBRD
and others in close partnership with the Bosnian authorities, as a framework for postwar reconstruction.
The PRRP served as an umbrella for overall donor activities. Between end-1995 and end-1998, some
US$4.5 billion in donor funding was committed for reconstruction and recovery activities in over a dozen
sectors (page 5). Twelve donors provided 82 percent of this funding (Table), more than 40 percent from
European donors. Donor support has been highly concessional, with about three-quarters of aid provided
as grant, and nearly all of the rest on concessional loan terms.

1996-1998n
2
MultilateralInstitutions
US$M
EC

WB
EBRD
IMF
Bilaterals

Bilaterals

JaSa5286

Percentage

1027

23Mn

613

14%
2%
2%

97

81
758

17o
1

Donor coordination arrangements for the PRRP included
annual donor conferences co-chaired by the European Union
(EU) and the Bank, designed to gather pledges for the agreed
PRRP. The Bank and the European Commission (EC), with the
authorities and in consultation with donors and others, issued
regular reports monitoring progress on the implementation of
programs and projects. The Bank and EC also annually updated
the PRRP to reflect changing needs. Sector task forces were
established to coordinate donor assistance in specific sectors,
and periodic sectoral technical meetings were also called, often
chaired by the Bank and the EC (e.g., in the power and

Netherlands

285

6%

transport, health and education sectors).

Switzerland
Italy

129

3%

114

Norwany

-106

3%
2i

As part of its aid coordination and resource mobilization
role, the Bank has mobilized over US$1.5 billion to co-fund
IDA-supported projects (total IDA and IDA-like resources of
US$698 million as of end-1999, or a ratio of about 2 to 1).3
Over US$300 of this total has been channeled through some
100-plus Trust Funds established with and managed by the

Gerdany
Sweden
Subtotal

106
93
3,700

2%
82%

Others
TOTAL

8061
4,506

18%
100%

2%

Bank.

Substantial information on donor partnership has been provided in periodic reports prepared by the Bank and the EC, most
recently: Bosnia and Herzegovina: Review of the Priority Reconstruction Program and Looking Ahead Towards Sustainable
Economic Development, May, 1999.
2Following

the May 1999 Donor Conference, total pledges and commitments exceeded the total program requirement of US$5.1

billion.
3Includes

US$150 million in special resources from the World Bank Trust Fund for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Annex3

Govemment

~R5State

EStCnton
Municipality

"

Municipaity

EnStitey

nMultilateral
Institutions'

IMF,IDA, EU

IMP,IDA
.F

Entoty

Entity, Canton,Municipality

Entity, Canton

Entity, Canton

EU,OHR

EU,IDA

EU,IDA, IsDB

EU,IDA

Austria,Canada,Ireland,Italy,

a

Bilateral
Institutions

US

us

Bilateral
us
US

Lis
US

rrp

EU, IDA, IsDB, IFAD,

Entity Muncipality

State.Entity. Canton,Munccpality

EBRD,EU,IDA

EBRD,EU,IDA

Finld,

France,Germy, Italy,

AustpaGnNeranyItaly

Genmany,Netherlands,

Sweden,Switzerlad,

Italy, Norway,Switzerland, Sweden,Switzerland,UK, US

Turkey,US

us

FrwanciGemn,
Mlyital,
Gemnyaehelnp,Fnand.
Netherlands,
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Japan,
Ge
aasa
uat
Jpn
UK, Austria,
No",SuiAaiu,Turkey,
Italy, Japan,
ehrad,Grmany,
Maasa Netherlands,
Norway,Sweden, Italy, Malaysia,
~~~~~~~Netherlands.
N
aaaFac,Jpn
rba
owy SaudiUS
ad
Netherlands,SaudiArabia, Norway,
Noray,
Switeerland,Turkey,US, UK
Norway, Spain,
Netherlands,
France,Japan,
raiaArabia,s,SadiArbi,Canada,
oray Saudi
Sui Aehraband,
U,

Spain,Switzerland,US

Sweden

I

Austria, Finland,Germany, Austria,Canada.Finland,

Mniity

Spain,Switzerland,US

FoodAid,CareIntemnational,

yBaet
Civl S
erCivilSociety

Mercy
..
. iniernational/USA Islamic
Relief Worldwide, Action Contre, Education,Care
Is Faim,Catholic Relief Services, International,Citizens
Initiative, CatholicRelief
La Benevolencija,Edinburgh
Direct Aid, ChildrenServices,Red
Sarvies,
h e d Services,International
DAid,Childrkn
.,.aDiret
RescueCommittee,Refugee
Denmark,Savethe
ChildrenFund (USA),Childrenmn Trust Ireland,Mercy Corps
Europe/ScottishEuropean
A ommes,
Crisis,
A
Terre des
AssociazioneAinici dei Bambini. Aid, NorwegianRefugee
Savethe Children(UK), Women's Council,Wortd Vision
International.
BiServices,
MalteserHilfsdienst,
Intern
Bite BOSFAM,

SwedishRescueServicesAgency,
SaudiHigh CommissionRelief for
BH, Catholic Relief Services,
AmericanRefugeeCommittee,
lnternational Rescue
Committee,Mercy
European
lCorps/Scottish
Aid

Danish RefugeeCouncil, Mercy
CorpsEurope/ScottishEuropeAid,
NorwegianPeoples Aid, SOS
Kinderdorf International,Lutheran
World Federation,Norwegian
RefugeeCouncil, Intemnational
RescueCommittee,World Vision
International,ManagementGroup.

WoSPnO

Norwegian People'sAid, Antics

iPrivateSector

Note: Reflectsactivitiesto date,andplannedactivities. IDA shownin bold reflectsplannedIDA supportduring theFYOO-02CASperiod.
becauseof its rolein implementingthe civilian aspectsof the DaytonAgreement,is involvedin every sectorshown in oneway or another.
The Office of the High Representative,

FDI in Forestry

FDt in telecom

Annex3

*Pioft

Fostroninental and Cultural4utr

Entity
Municipality

Entity
Municipality

EU, IDA

IDA, IsDB, UNESCO
Egypt, France.
astria
'
Austria,
Eg/ypt,Frnce,
.Germny Greece, Italy, Kuwait,
a Lunemboueg,Malaysia,
Neitherlands

UK
Switzerland,Turkey,
________

___
___

____

Water and Sewrage

___

g
Aga Khan Trast, High Saudi
Commission, Islamic,
C
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, SOROS,
. Swedish Cultural Heritage
without Borders, World
Monument Fund,

Winanetal
Utbatt Stiategy (Honastig)

Entity
Mamncipality

IDA, EU, UNHCR

Austria, Canada, Finland,
France, Germany,Italy,
Geany, No-ay, Sweden
Kuwait, Malaysia
Germany.,Nomy
SadiNetherlands,
Arabia, Sweden,
Araia, Seden,KU
Switzerland,

sItytledi

ft
Rn

Pro rtnu- Kt ParIte
qecvery

S.tem
(Banking)

Sfittot
of
Ptriva otegy
Developatent

Entity

Entity
Canton

IDA, EU, IFC

Germany.

US

Fla
nI.andmin
pmem
nmic
iei

State
Entity

Fearns
ce

State
Entity
Cauton
Munici

EU, OSCE

EBRD, IDA, IFC

EU, IDA

Germany, Italy,
Kurait,
Netherlands. Saadi
Arabia, Turkey, US

Canada, Denmark,
Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, Norway,
Sweden, US

Austria, Canada, Denmark,
Germamy,Ireland, Japan,
Malaysia, Netherlands, Spain,
Switzerland, UK, US

Mine Awareness
orwegian Peoples
Aid, International
Committee of Red
Cross

Democratization
Helsinki Citizens Assembly,
Circle 99 (Association of
Independent Intellectuals),
Human Rights Office,
Intemational Crisis Group,
Citizens Forum -Tuzia,
National Democratic Institute
for IntemnationalAffairs,
Human Rights Citizens
Initiative, Helsinki Citizens
Assembly Independent Bureau
for Humanitarian Issues,
Citizens Forum Tuzla, Human
Rights Watch, Helsinki
Committee for Human Rights
Citizens Voime,Biser Intemational Women's
Initiative.

UK, US_

E

eiO
mplymt

'

Refugos, dnsptacd personns

Etty
Canton
Muncipality

State
Ent.ty
Canton
Canty
Manicipality

IDA, EU, UNHCR

EU, UNHCR

various

varous

Income Generation
Care International, International
Catholic Migration Commission,
Catholic Relief Services, Norwegian
Peoples Aid, Intenational Rescue
Committee, Mercy Corps, Europe/
Scottish Europe Aid, World Vision
International, BOSPO Tuzla, Lok
Sarajevo, La Benevolencija

Repatriation/Return
Care International, Independent
Bureau for Humamitarian Issues,
Helsinki Citizen Assembly,
International Catholic Migration
Commission, American Refugee
Committee, Save the Children
Fund (UK), Danish Refugee
Council, Mercy Corps
Europe/Scottish European Aid,
World Vision International.

pality

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Community Development. Care
International, Helsinki Citizens
Assembly, Independent Bureau for
HumanitariamIssues, Biser International Women's Initiative,
Catholic Relief Services, International
Rescue Committee, Norwegian People's
Aid, BOSPO - Tuzla, BOSFAM - Tuzla
Danish Refugee Council , TALDI - Tuzia, Malteser Hilfsdienst.
Shelter/ Housing, International
Management Group, Swedish Rescue
Services Agency, Catholic Relief
Services, Danish Refugee Council,
Norwegian People's Aid. International
Rescue Committee, Mercy Corps
Europe, Scottish European Aid, World
Vision Intematnonal .

Housing privatization

mot$a

Private bamks

Enterprise
privatization,
FDI enterprises

Note: Reflects activities to date, and planned activities. IDA shown in bold reflects planned IDA support dunng the FYOO-02CAS period.
Sectors related specifically to post conflict challenges.

Development of local
private sector
demining capacity.

Development of private
sector.SMEs

Annex 3
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
AND RECOVERYPROGRAM"'
PRIORITYRECONSTRUCTION
ProgramFundingRequirements,AmountsCommitted,UnderImplementationand Disbursedby ProgramObjectiveand Sector
(as of Dec. 31,1998, in US$ million)
Firm
I
1996-98Firm Commitmentsl Commitments
Priority
1996as % of
_,Reconstruction Under
Amount
98
1
share

million
US9
Program
1,961
73%
58%
NetworkInfrastructure
Implementation
Requirements
_
Requirements
Sector

Amount Under
Implementation as 1
Amount
, _____________~I
Total
% of59%
_
_Disbursed_
Requirements

j

_ _ __ ___ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __

_

_ _

_ _ _

1. PhysicalReconstruction

_ _ _

_$__ m
_

_ _ _

_ _ _ _

3,310

1

_
illio
_ _ _n_

_

_

_ _ _

Amount Disbursed
as % of
Requirements

Req i re ent

59%

Di s ursdr2
1,524

287
41
337

53%
30%
54%

189
26
288

35%
19%
46%

61%
59%
94%
46%

181
87
635
57

52%
52%
89%

120
75
503
43

34%
45%
71%
25%

65%
70%

168
168

49%
61%

136
144

40%
52%

69%
68%
74%
65%

613
363
117
131
133

57%
61%
45%
59%

552
335
101
116

51%
57%
39%
51%

96%

641

90%

...

445
158
37

_ _ _ _

_ _

_ _ _

_ __US

2,431

58%_

73%

1 961

368
78
513

9%'
2
%I
'
12%

68%
59%
82%

213
99
667
78

5% l
2%
Y
'
16%
2% '
,5%,

_ _ _

_
_

46%

;

Network Infrastructure
Transport
Telecommuhications
Electric Power & Coal
CommunityRevivalf
Water and Sanitation
District Heat and Gas
Housing
LandmineClearing
SocialSectors
Health
Education

542
134
623
350
166
710
170
340
275
.

~

1,078
593
260
225

2. Economic Re-start
Industry& Finance
Agriculture
EmploymentGeneration

712

3. Transition: Fiscal
Support\Gov't Inst.Bldg.
3
InstitutionBuilding'
Social Protection

@

'
l

1

~1

~

j
1
.

T

TOTAL
Peace Implementation
GRANDTOTAL

5%

_
___I__._l

18%
740
10%'
403
15%
_Y
_
~~~~~~_
3%j
146
685

,

485

...
..
...

TransitionTA

221
192

485

163
37

16%I
lI

~~12..
12%...
4%.
I%

...

D33

.,

_60/

498

70%

373..
373
125
125

.

31

..

5,100

1

3,856

92%1

2,574

50%

n.a.

1

320

8%:

n.a

265

n.a.

217

n.a.

5,100

!

4,176

100%1

82%

3,479

68%

2,791

5S

_~~~~

76%

3,215

63%

1

_

to thisprogram.
donorshavecontributed
andnearly50 bilateral
" Twelvemultilateral
are54%.
of totalrequirements
as a percentage
millionexpended.Fundsexpended
fora totalof US$2,752
to suppliers,
for futurepayments
totalof US$39millionin advances
v Includesanestimated
US$240millionfiscalsupport.
3' Includes
are nolongerdeemedapplicable.
originalfundingrequirements
of thecurrentsituation.Therefore,
knowledge
havebeenrevisedfor somesectorsto reflectimproved
estimates
- Financial
t
Bolsiaable
Nota
Sunca.
DonorDatabase.
Source:ECNvBBosniaandHerzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovinaat a gla-nce
LowerBosnia Eu,rope&
Central mIddleanid
A.sia lwioie
Heregovina

andSOCIAL
POVERTY
mid-year(milions)
Population,
GNPper capita(Atlasmethod,V$$)
GNP(Atlasmethod,US$billion.5).

4,2
92a
319

47
2A190
1,039~

eLife
1,710
1.557

1,

0.1
O%
0

1,1
$5

4/24/00

_

diamond'
Development
expectancy

Averageannualgrowth,1992.98
Population(%)
Laborforce

-

.

1992-6
Mostrecentestimate(latestyearavailtable,
el povertyline)
belown,ation
Poverty(%of population)
(%of totalpopulation)
Urbanpopulation
at birth(years)
Lifeexpectancy
Infantmortality(per1,000livebirths)
(%/of childrenunder5)
Childmalnutrition
Accessto safewater(%of population)
Illiteracy(%/of populationage1.5+)
populationy
Grossprimaryenrollment(%ofschool-age
Male

.

.

.

42
71
13

88
69
23

Ss
68
38

GNP
per
ait

Gross

Iprimary

nolmn

to safewater
Access

..
.,

4
100
101

..

.,

99

Female

75
14.
1loBoni
105
100.

-

_

_

osi

andHlerzegovina
group
Lower-middle-income
_

_

_

_

_

_

TREN4DS
RATIOSandLONG-TERM
KEYECONOMIC
GDP(US$billions)35
Grossdomesticinvestment/GDP
Exportsofgoodsandservices/GDP
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP
Grossnationalsavings/GDP

___

..

.

Currentaccountbalance/GDP
Interestpayments/GDP
TotaldebttGDP
Totaldebtservice/exports
Presentvalue*of debtlGOP
Presentvalueof debt/exports

41.4
285s
4.2
11.3
.. O.-30.
.

.
-.

1100
38.0
..
..

1978-8 1988-98
(averageannualgrowth)
GOP
GNPpercapita
Exports of goods and services

.

41
380Trd
3-37Trd
I'll
10:9
-27A1
I.A
.
74.0:
10.0
60,0
179,0

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing

ratios'
Economic

Domestic
aig

Investment

Indebtedness

1997

1998 1"99802

2-95
281

1l,0
12.1

95
11.5

53.3

33.7

17.0

1997

1998

andGDP(%
Growthof Investment

17.0
27.0
56.

15.8
27.8
564

so0-

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)

_

andHerzegovina
-Bosnia
group
Lower-middle-income
__________________

_______________

1988
~ ~~~~1978
.

..

.

..

80.
2

0

Privateconsumption
consumption
Generalgovernment
Importsof goodsand services

.

...

..

.

.

.

1968898

(average
growth)1978-88
anual
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing.

.

..

..

....

..

-20 -

93

94

95

GDI
74.1

70.6

1997

1998

99

97

98

--- GDP

________________

(%)
of exports
andimports
Growth
200
0

.

...

Services

.0

Privateconsumption
consumption
Generalgovernment

..

Gross domestic investment

.

..

3.7

.3.5

Importsof goodsandservices

.

..

15.2

7.8

Gross national product

.

..

31.8

17.5

5
93

90
94
Esports

99

97

98

lf-Imports

____________________

estimates.
Note:1998dataarepreliminary
average.Ifdataare missing,thediamond
withits income-group
in thecountry(inbold)compared
'Thediamondsshowfourkeyindicators
willbeincomplete.
in 1998.
*Afterdebtrescheduling

Bosnia and Herzegovina
PRICESandGOVERNMENT
FINANCE
Domestc prices

1978

1988

1997

1998

Inflation(%)

(% change)

20

Consumerprices(KMIFederation)
Implicit GDP deflator

..
..

..
..

14.0
..

5.0

10

0

..

-10-10
-20

Governmentfinance
(%of GDP,lncludescurnt grants)
Current revenue

Currentbudgetbalance
Overall surplus/deficit

..
.

..

27.8

1.3

*

32.6

93

20.7

1997

1998

575

817

SS

6s97

98

~-z'GDPdeflator

-30

-0.6

23.0

94

.CPI

(KM,Federation)

TRADE
1978
(USS

1988

Exportand importlevels(USSmill.)

millions)

Total exports(fob)

CommodityI
Commodty2
Manufactures
Totalimports(cif)
Food
Fuelandenergy

..

..

2,500
200

..
..

2,333

2,573

1500
10r0

..
r

Capidalgoods

Exportpriceindex(1995=100)

2,000

Import price index (1995=100)

..
..

Terms of trade (1995=100)

..

o

9

..
..
..

..

93 94
e Exports

..

R

Imports

_.._..

BALANCE
of PAYMENTS
1978

1988

1997

1998

Currentaccountbalanceto GDP (%)

2,864

o.

(USS ofilions)
Importsof goodsandservices

..

..

Resourcebalance

21606
-1,604

-1,498

Netincome
Nelcurrenttransfers

..

..

28
772

11
510

Currentaccountbalance

..

..

-1,060

-1,098

-25

1,151
-91

1,014
85

-30
-35

Financingitems(net)
Changes
in netreserves
Memo:
Reservesincludinggold(US$ nillions)
Conversion rate (DEC,local KM/US$)

..
..

..
..

80

175

1.73

1.76

1997

1998

2,981
566
292

2,981
596
437

385

131

36

35

2

2

996

917

126

181

1
-20

EXTERNAL
DEBTand RESOURCE
FLOWS
(USSmillions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

1978

1988

Compositionof 1998debt(US$mill.)
..
..
..

..
..
..

..

..

Totaldebtservice
IBRO

IDA
Composition
of netresourceflows
Off'icialgrants
Ofricial creditors

Privatecreditors& others
Foreign direct investment
Porifolio equity

G.

A: 596

F: 400

B:437
.

..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

0

0

..
.

..

.

..
..

-107

B 3

-75

0
0

100
0

77
65
o0

100
135
0

..

65

135

..
..

38
27

C:77
E: 1,124

70

WorldBankprogram(1BRD
& IDA)
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Netl Iows
Interest payments
Nettransfers

Including
extemalfinancedpublicprojects.
Development
Economics

A -IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

E -Bilateral
D - Other multilateral

F - Private
G - Short-term

__1

38
97

4124/00

Annex B2

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Numberof Projects Under Implementationa
Average ImplementationPeriod (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources(total US$)
Average Supervision(US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

FY97

FY98

FY99

FY00

11
0.83
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
429.37

16
1.13
0.00
0.00
6.25
2.78
104.66

18
1.36
0.00
0.00
11.11
7.78
50.06

15
1.85
0.00
0.00
13.33
14.05
19.66

Yes
0.0
0.0

Yes
2,390.8
149.4

Yes
1,089.0
60.5

Planned
1420.4 1/
94.7

Last Five FYs
3
57.88
0
0

As shown in the Annual Reporton Portfolio Performance(except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on developmentobjectives (DO) and/or implementationprogress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio ImprovementProgram.
Ratio of disbursementsduring the year to the undisbursedbalance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginningof the year: Investmentprojects only.

" Total supervision resourceamount for FY00 is shown in direct cost only.

Annex B3

Bosniaand Herzegovina
IndicativeIDALendingProgram
Proposed IDA Higher Range Base-CaseLending Program a
Fiscal year
2000

2001

2002

Project
AdjustmentLending
First Social Sector Adjustment Credit
(SOSAC I)
Investment Lending
Power 1I1
EducationIII
Mostar Water
Emergency Labor Redeployment
RS Line of Credit II
Total FY00
Adjustment Lending
Business EnvironmentAdjustment
Credit (BAC)
InvestmentLending
Trade Facilitation
PrivatizationTA
Local Initiatives II
Transport III
Total FY01
AdjustmentLending
Second Social Sector Adjustment Credit
(SOSAC II)
Third Public Finance Adjustment Credit
(PFSAC 1II)
InvestmentLending
Pension/HealthTA
EnvironmentalInfrastructure
Municipal Services
Agriculture 11
Total FY02
Grand Total FYOO-02

US$(M)

Strategic Rewards Implementationb
b (HIMIL)
Risks (HIMIL)

30.0

H

H

30.0
11.0
12.0
25.0
6.0
114.0

H
H
H
H
H

M
L
M
M
L

40.0

H

H

12.0
10.0
10.0
15.0
87.0

H
H
H
M

M
H
L
L

30.0

H

H

35.0

H

M

5.0
9.0
10.0
10.0
99.0
300.0

H
M
M
M

M
L
L
M

a. This tablepresentsthe proposedprogramfor the nextthreefiscalyears.
b. Foreachproject,indicatewhetherthe strategicrewardsand implementation
risksare expectedto be high(H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B3

Bosnia and Herzegovina- IFC and MIGA Program
FY97-2001

IFC approvals(US$m)1

1997

1998

1999

7.70

18.11

7.84

(planned)
2000
0

2001
2.3

Sector (%)
CHEMICALS& PETROCHEMS
FINANCIALSERVICES
FOOD & AGRO-BUSINESS
INDUST &,CONSUMERSVCS
MANUFACTURING
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER

Total

34
12

34
3
31
32

100

66

loo

88
100

100

0

Investmentinstrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)
Guarantees PendingApproval

66
34

100

62
3
34

100

100

99

0.000

0.000

0.000

0

0
26.5

In addition, the Balkan Enterprise Facility has been approved and is expected to lead to
additional investmentsin Bosnia and Herzegovina.

100

Annex B4

Bosniaand Herzegovina
Summaryof NonlendingServices
Product'

CompletionFY

Cost (US$000)

Audiencea

Obiectiveb

Recent completions
Reconstruction Assessment
FYOO-02CAS
Labor Legislation TA
Oil Import Review
Poverty and Income Vulnerability Note

FY99
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00

83.2
75
28.8
30
20

G, D, B, PD
G, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, B

KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

Underway
IDF Grant - Statistics
Anti-Corruption Diagnosis and Strategy
Economic Development Strategy TA
Household Survey (LSMS) TA
Labor Market Study and TA
FIAS Barriers to investment study2
IDF - Environmental Action Plan

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01

30
100
50
170
150
65
60

G, PD
G, D, PD
G, D, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Planned
Local Government Finance Study
IDF Grant - Reconciliation
Public Expenditure Review
Financial Management Assesment
Creditworthiness Review
CAS Progress Report
Country Economic Memorandum
Poverty Assessment
FY03-04 CAS

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY02
FY02
FY02

65
20
150
40
20
40
250
200
80

G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
KG, PD, PS
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD

Manyof theseactivitiescontributeto supportthe preparationof the I-PRSP(FY01)and full PRSP(FY02).
2. Thisis a FIAS-sponsored
study(andadditionalfundingwill be providedby otherdonors).
a. Government,Donor,Bank, PublicDissemination.
b. KnowledgeGeneration,PublicDebate,Problem-Solving.
1

Annex B5

Bosnia and HerzegovinaSocial Indicators
Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

Lowermiddleincome

1970-75

1980-85

1993-98

Europe&
CentralAsia

4.0
1.4
31.3
2.6

4.3
1.1
37.6
2.0

4.2
-0.4
42.2
1.6

474.7
0.1
66.2
1.6

886.5
0.9
57.7
2.5

920

2,200

1,740

90
125

155
155

131
131

..

7.1

4.0

3.0

..
..

6.6
8.2

5.1
8.8

4.9

-

100
100
100

100
100
99

94
95
93

85

90

85
79

91
89

89
89

POPULATION
Total population,mid-year(millions)
Growthrate(% annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation(% of population)
Total fertilityrate(births perwoman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
Nationalheadcountindex
Urbanheadcountindex
Ruralheadcountindex
INCOME
GNPper capita (US$)
Consumerpriceindex (1995=100)
Federation(in KM terms)
RepublikaSrpska(in DM/KMterms) a/
Foodprice index(1995=100)

..
..

INCOMEICONSUMPTION
DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowestquintile(% of incomeor consumption)
Highestquintile(% of incomeor consumption)

..
..

..
..

SOCIALINDICATORS
Publicexpenditureb/
Health (% of GDP)

Education(% of GNP)
Socialsecurityand welfare(% of GDP)cl
Net primaryschool enrollmentrate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female

..

..

..

..

Accessto safewater
(%of population)
Totald/
Urban
Rural
Immunizationrate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT

..
..

Childmalnutrition(% under5 years)
Life expectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male

Female
Mortality
Infant(per thousandlive births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult(15-59)
Male(per 1,000 population)
Female(per 1,000population)
Matemal(per 100,000live births)

67
65

71
68

73
71

69
65

68
65

70

73

76

74

72

51

27

13

22

35

..

..

..

26

44

283
120

244
137

182
130

181
108

165
93

..

2000 WorldDevelopmentIndicatorsCO-ROM,World Bank
a/ Until mid-1998 priceswere observedin YUD and convertedinto DM/KM at exchangeratesin the parallel marketin the Belgrade,
as reported by the NBFRY through end-1998..
b/ Including cantongovemmentexpenditure in Federation.Excluding municipal government expendituresin both Entities, aswell
as donor financed social sectorprograms.
c/ Excluding government spendingon housingassistance.
d/ Large capacityof the country'swater supply was damagedduring the war andhas been restoredlargely to pre-war levels through
reconstruction efforts since 1994.

Annex B6

Bosnia and Herzegovina - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'

Actual
1995
1996

1994

1997

Estimate
1998

1999

100

88
32
28
11
21

85
32
29
11
21

83
28
25
8
20

78
25
23
6
19

34
58

34
53

34
51

35
46

36
40

1
11

9
17

12
16

15
18

17
18

22
21

3518

4054

4594

5441

6389

7239

9244

640

820

920

990

1200

1430

1610

2040

69.2

29.5

13.0

10.0

15.0

14.0

10.0

5.0

66.9

28.2

12.1

9.5

14.4

13.4

9.5

4.5

49.7

13.9

6.4

0.2

10.6

9.6

7.4

2.3

100

100

100

25

21

17

16

Industry

26

27

26

28

29

Services

38

48

54

55

55

..

..

131
20
12
4
15

117
42
35
20
22

104
41
36
20
21

99
38
33
16
22

91
33
29
14
20

15
87

20
71

24
83

28
74

34
71

..

-31
10

-17
15

-4
11

1889

2734

Exports(GNFS)b
Imports(GNFS)
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

..

..

2005

100

100

36

..

2002

100

100

100

Agriculture

Total Consumption
Gross domestic investment (+ increase in stocks)
Gross domestic fixed investment
Governmentinvestment
Private investment

Projected
2001

2000

..

100
..

Memorandum items

Gross domesticproduct
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

1254

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
..
20.8
Real annual per capita growth rates (%,calculatedfrom 1995prices)

Gross domesticproduct at market prices
Total consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports(GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports(GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resourcebalance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

..
..

..
..

194
91
1085
894
-891
879
-177

381
152
1334
1082
-953
1002
-193

658
336
2278
1882
-1620
1094
94

1002
575
2606
2333
-1604
772
-486

1367
817
2864
2573
-1498
510
-372

1560
970
2661
2399
-1101
417
-228

1835
1156
2899
2622
-1064
265
-522

2179
1410
3239
2932
-1060
232
-531

2533
1671
3332
3024
-799
197
-439

3357
2244
3664
3339
-307
34
-285

-177

-193

-748

-1060

-1098

-763

-882

-916

-689

-355

0
-271
-144

0
514
628

0
19
126

100
106
181

60
181
255

125
267
340

175
227
281

200
158
200

200
28
70

( Includingofficialcurrent& capital transfers)

Current account balance, inc currenttransfers
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-termloans (net)
o/w: Multelateral & PC creditorsC
Other capital (net,inc. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd(-indicates increase)

0
-258
-119
433

595

-365

558

80

475

138

178

156

126

2

-131

-243

-91

85

-489

-8

-50

-75

-69

-71.1

-50.4

-59.3

-45.6

-36.9

-24.0

-19.5

-16.6

-11.0

-3.3

..

..

158.4
80.1

72.3
24.8

39.3
8.1

15.3
-9.5

15.7
6.1

18.4
8.5

15.0
0.2

5.6
1.4

Memorandum items

Resourcebalance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandiseexports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

Annex B6

Bosnia and Herzegovina - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

Public finance (as % of GDP at marketprices) 9
Total expenditure
Current revenues h..
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capitalexpenditure
Foreignfinancing
Extra-budeteryexpenditure'
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2(%)
Consumer price index (% change)
Federation (in KM tenms)
Republika Sirpska (DM/KM-based
index)k

Actual
1995
1996

1994

..

..

29.0
..
..

..
..

..

..
..

..

17.9

14.6
8.5

-4
21

1997

Estimate
1998

1999

2000

Projected
2001
2002

2005

65.2
37.3
41.1
-3.9
24.1
28.0

50.8
27.8
26.5
1.3
24.3
23.0

53.3
32.6
33.2
-0.6
20.1
20.7

48.8
32.0
33.1
-1.1
15.7
16.8

45.1
31.6
32.5
-0.9
12.6
13.5

43.9
32.1
32.9
-0.8
11.0
11.9

41.3
32.2
32.8
-0.7
8.5
9.1

34.8
31.0
31.1
-0.1
3.8
3.9

11.1

11.5

11.5

12.9

12.4

11.1

10.2

9.3

18.8
95.9

19.3
52.3

21.7
31.3

27.6
37.4

25.6
10.2

-

-25
17

14
-7

5
2

0
13

3
3

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS"denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includesnet unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Accrual base.
f. Includesdebt rescheduling& relief.
g. Consolidated centralgovemment.
h. Includes official current grants, which are of small amounts.
i. Social funds in the Federation.
J. "LCU" denotes "local currencyunits." Anjncrease in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
k. Until mid-1998 prices were observed in YUD and converted into DM using the parallel market exchange rate.

3
3

3
3

3
3

Annex B7

Table 2: Bosnia and Herzegovina - Key Exposure indicators

Indicator

Projected
2002
2003

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

3518

3884

3879

2981

3101

3348

3629

3819

231

135

213

220

275

307

207

513

573

385

124

135

113

148

177

173

150

923
186
135

590
142
87

387
110
38

199
68
8

182
62
7

167
57
5

151
53
6

140
50
6

131
48
6

123
45
4

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

2000

2001

2004

2005

3954

4063

4137

153

122

63

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed(TDO)(USSm)'
Netdisbursements(USSmn)Y'
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)'
Debt and debt service indicators

131

(%)

TDO/XGS'
TDO/GDP
TDSIXGS
Concessional/TDO
LBRDexposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$S)d
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

14

2

9

27

27

26

36

40

33

33

38

22
19

3
2

10
3

32
3

51
2

50
2

54
2

66
2

65
2

56
2

46
2

623
0.5

596
0.5

596
0.5

596

596

596

590

570

557

550

546

..

..

..

..

..

..

0
0

1
0

2
0

2
0

3
0

5
0

4
0

4
0

4
0

5
0

-

234

292

437

465

661

769

879

953

991

1018

IDA exposure indicators (%)
IDA DS/public DS
IDA DS/XGS
IDATDO (USSm)d
IFC (US$mn)
Loans

218
74
10

15

15

8

IS

17

Equity and quasi-equity'

0

0

3

3

4

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

0

0

0

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, nse of IMF credits and net short-term capital. After debt rescheduling.
b "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers remittances.
d. Iicludes present value of guarantees.
Source: Official data and staff estimates.

Annex B8

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Statementof IFC's
Held and DisbursedPortfolio
As of 2/29/00
(In US Dollars Millions)
IFC Held
FY Approval
1997/99
1985
1997
1998
1999
1999
1998
1999
1997
1977
1998
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999

Company
Bosnia Micro
Energoinvest
Enterprise Fund
SEF Akova
SEF Bosnalijek
SEF Kopex
SEF Lignosper
SEF Lijanovici
Sarajevska
TKA Cazin
Wood Agency-AL
Wood Inga
Wood Konjuh
Wood Kozara
Wood Podgradci
Wood Vrbas

Total Portfolio:

IFC Disbursed

Loan
Equity Quasi Partic Loan
Equity Quasi Partic
0.00
0.85
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.85
0.00
0.00
7.92
0,00
0.00
0.00
7.92
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.39
0.00
0.00
1.91
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.91
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.23
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.23
0.00
2.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.81
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.24
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.24
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.34
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.34
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.48
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.26
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.33
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.13
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.93
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.58
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
35.46

2.65

2.23

0.00

27.49

1.24

2.23

0.00

CAS Annex B8 - Bosnia and Herzegovina
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Closed 4
Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Board

Last PSR

Date

Supervision Rating bI

DvlpetIpeetto

Fiscal
Year

1997

Active Projects

P045310

EMG PUB WORKS & EMPL

DeveloDment

Obiectives
S

1.11

1.52

0

23.04
0.31
6.2
2.34
3.62
9.37
3.88
10.11
25.33
14.25
43.66
144.69

22.59
0.26
2.7
1.58
4.11
0.47
2.27
3.54
-0.44
-0.07
68.76

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

10

0

0
0

15
7

0
0

0

11

0

25
5
7
17
39
10
4
12
50
15
72

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

P045313

EDUCATION RECONSTR.
ELEC. POWER II

S
S
HS

HS

S

S

S

S

S

S
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S

0
0

0

S

1998

S

0

2.19
0.4

S
S
S
S

S

0.79

1.34
0.13

Undisb.

S
S

S
S

0.61

Cancel.

ESSEN. HOSPITAL SERV
LOCAL INITIATIVES

EM PILOT CREDIT (RS)
FORESTRY
RECON ASST-REPUBLIKA
TRANSPORT RECON. II
BASIC HEALTH
CULT. HERITAGE PILOT
ENT EXP FACIL (BEEF)
ENTER & BANKING PRIV
LOCAL DEVELOPMENT
PFSAC II

Frm Rev'd

IDA

Progress

P044522
P045311
P045483
P050892
P045134
P048462
P045484
P044523
P059763
P062936
P048461
P056192
P055432

Orig.

IBRD

ImPlementation

1997
1997
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999

Disbursements al

Original Amount in USS Millions

TOTAL PORTFOLIO

to date minusactual disbursementsto date as projectedat appraisal.
a. Intendeddisbursements

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

299

Annex B9
Page l of3
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (HIGHER RANGE BASE CASE)
Overarching objective: Increase economic opportunity and improve quality of life for all Bosnians

Diagnosis

DevelopmentObjective

Strategy/Action

PerformanceBenchmarks'

Bank Group
Instruments

Key Activitiesof
Partners

Strengthenweakandfragmentedgovernanceto builda solidfoundationfor inclusivegrowthand participation
Overall.Progresssincewar's end in
strengtheningof institutions
(especiallypublic finance)has
contributedto stablemacro
performanceand stronggrowth,but
govemanceand institutionsremain
weakand fragmentedand
accountabilityand participationare

Buildgoodgovemanceby
Preparea medium-termEconomicDevelopmentStrategy(EDS), CPI:
TA for EDS (FYOO-02)EU FeasibilityStudy
increasingcapacity,credibility in broad consultationwith stakeholders(includingNGOs,local *
Completionof EconomicDevelopment TA for I-PRSP(FY01) "Road Map"
OHR Strategy
and accountabilityof public govemments,and other groups),that includesspecificgoals,
Strategy (by mid 2000;)maintain
and PRSP (FY02)
exercises
institutionsand maintaining action planand monitoringindicators to strengthenpublic
linkageto PRSP process.
institutions,improvegovemanceand maintainfiscalbalance.
*
PresentEDS to ConsultativeGroup
fiscal balance,especiallyin
Meeting(2000)
light of decreasingdonor
*
CompletePRSP (by 15Q 2001)
flows.

low.

Transparency.The war erodedthe
integrityof public institutionsand the
rule of law;weak new institutionsand
politicalenvironmentfragmentedby
ethnicdivisionsleavesspacefor
corruptionand rent-seeking.

Improvetransparencyand
accountabilityof publicsector
reform,especiallyfinancial
control, legaland regulatory
systems

*
*
*
*
*
*

Developanti-corruptionstrategyand action plan
Establishbordercontrol and strengthencustoms
Reformpaymentbureaus
Strengthenpublicaudit agencies,establishTreasuries
Strengthencourtsandjudiciary reform
Increasetransparencyof publicenterprises(especially
powerand telecom)

*
*
*

BSI: Completeanti-corruptiondiagnosis Anti-Corruption
Diagnosis& Strategy
and developaction planwith
stakeholdersand donors
(FYO-01)
BSI: Successfulcompletionof payment TTFSE(FY01)
PFSACIt (SPN)
bureaureform(by end 2000)
CPI1Reducedextemal corruptionand PFSAC IIt(FY02)
rule of law indicators(TI index,EBRD PowerIII (FY00)

OHR Anti-Corruption
Strategy
IMF SBA/PRGF
EU (judiciary)EU
CAFAO(customs),
EBRD (telecom),
OSCE (partyreform),

indexes)

IJS and others various

.

Publicfinance management.Public Continuedimprovcmentof
investmentlevelsunsustainablyhigh, publicfinancemanagement
expenditurespoorlytargetedand
revenuecollectionremainsfragile;
especiallyimportantin light of
diminishingdonorflowswhichwill
require carefulfiscal managementto
maintainmacrostability.

*
*

*

Localgovernments.Local
Reformintergovernmental *
govemmentslack capacityand clear financeand strengtheninglocal
*
rules for inter-govemmentalfinance govemments

CPI: Establishmentof SupremeAudit
Agenciesand Treasuries
CPI/BSI:
Reduceand streamlinepublicinvestment
Improvedomesticrevenueeffortand performanceby
*
Decliningpublicinvestmentas a share
completionof tax harmonizationand reformto broadentax
of GDP
*
Revenuecollectionsvs.targets
base and reduceoveralltax burden,reformtax
*
Balancedbudgets
administration
*
Demobilizationtargets(consistentwith
Streamlinerecurrentexpenditures(reducemilitary
Daytonand subsequentagreements)
spendingand spendingon entitlementprograms;increase
spendingon maintenance,social sectorsand social
protection)
'Develop mechanismsto financeserviceswith geographic CPI/BSI:
spillovers(e.g., healthand higher education)
*
Number of public hearings.
*
Implementationof recommendationsof
Build localgovemmentcapacityand increase
LocalGovemmentFinanceStudy
accountabilityby disclosureof public informationand
Localenvironmcntallegislationand
holdingof publichearings/meetings.Build
cnvironmental *
enforcementlevels,qualityof waterand
managementcapacity(esp. waterand wastes)at local

government
level,

________________________

Capacitybuilding. Many sectoral Strengthen(andhelp create,as * DevelopStateand Entity level institutionswhereneeded
institutionsarestill weakand
needed)sectoralinstitutions
on efficiencygroundsor for Europeanintegration(e.g.,
fragmentedwith inadequatecapacity
cducationassessmentagency;electricpowerdispatchcenter)
or policy-makingabilities.
*
Strengthenexistingsectoralinstitutionsat local and Entity
level (e.g.,sectoralministries,pensionand health insurance
:funds)
.. ___________________________
____________________ _

wastesservices

initiatives
PER (FY01)
PFSAC11(SPN)
PFSACIII (FY02),
TTFSE(FY00),
EmergencyPilot Labor
Redeployment(FY00)

IMF SBA/PRGF
US (tax TA)
Japan (supportfor
MTEF)
EU CAFAO(customs)

LocalGovemment
Variousdonors
FinanceStudy (FY01) (Annex2)
NEAP(FY01)
LIP(SNP)
PublicWorks(SPN)
Mostar Waster(FY00)

Environ.Infra.(FY02)

CPI/BSI:
Ongoingoperations
Variousdonors
Project-specificinstitutionalcapacitybuilding EducationIII (FY00) (Annex2)
monitoringindicators(ongoingand planned MostarWater (FY00)
projects)
Power(FY00)
TransportIII(FY02)
Pens/HealthTA (FY02)

Includesboth countryperformanceindicators(CPI)and BankGroup self-evaluationindicators(BSI). In the contextof the EconomicDevelopmentStrategyprocessspecificcountry performance
indicatorswill be identifiedand monitored.

Annex B9
Page 2 of 3

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (HIGHER RANGE BASE CASE)
Overarching objective: Increase economic opportunity and improve quality of lifefor all Bosnians

Diagnosis

|

Performance Benchmarks'

Strategy/Action

Development Objective

Foster sustainable and inclusive private sector led growth and employment as the most
To addressoverallneedto stimulatesustainablegrowth,prepare *
Overall.Growthis now generated Makegrowthsustainableby
(EDS),in
by reconstructionand demandfor generatinga private-sectorsupply a medium-termEconomicDevelopmentStrategy
broad consultationwithstakeholders(includingthe private
response
servicesfrominternational
sector),that setsout a pro-poorinclusivegrowthstrategy. This
communityand remainshalfthe
shouldincludespecificgoals,an actionplan,and monitoring
prewarlevel. Need to encourage
indicatorsand includesidentificationof potentialfuturesources
sustainableprivatesectorsupply
of growthand competitiveness.
and
growth
recover
to
response
generateemployment

freely hiring and firing.

*

_

Key Activities of
Partners

important means of increasing opportunity
TA for EDS (FYO0-02)EU "RoadMap"
CPI: Completionof Economic
TA for l-PRSP(FY01) OHR Strategy
DevelopmentStrategy(EDS) by mid
exercises
2000;maintainlinkageto PRSP process. and PRSP (FY02)
CEM (FY02)
PresentEDS to 2000Consultative
GroupMeeting.

Identifyand eliminateadministrativebarriersto domestic CPI/BSI:
Preparationof ActionPlan to reduce
*
and foreigninvestment.
administrativebarriers,and
Promulgatebusinesslegislation(on bankruptcy,restitution,
*
implementationthrough
propertyrights,competition,etc.)
reformsand
regulatory/administrative
StimulateSMEgrowth (andimprovementsin banking
*
legislation(e.g.,bankruptcyand
sector)by continuingdonorfundedlinesof creditto
competition),and othermeasures.
privateSMEsas interimuntilbankingsector can
Creditavailability,SME firms' growth
*
intermediatecredit.
rates,SME contributionto GDP
Improveand increaseaccessto non-commercialrisk
*
Amountof risk insuranceavailablevs
*
insurance
demand,level of trade flowsfacilitated,
e peciall exporspecially___xports_
____
______
_______
______
_______
______
______
______
______
_______
______
_______
CPIBSil:
CompleteSMEprivatization
Accelerateenterpriseand bank *
Privatizationandbanking.
Numberof companies
Acceleratepreparationactivitiesfor largescaleenterprise *
Enterpriseand bank privatization privatizationand bankingsector *
privatized/liquidated(270 SMEs in
privatization/liquidation
bank
and
reform
has
launched,howeverprocess
Federation,148in RS; 100 largescalein
sector
banking
in
investment
foreign
Seek
*
to
beenslowerthan hopeddue
Federation,30 in RS).
(including
utilities
in
measures
corporatization
Continue
*
disagreementsamongthe parties
of banks privatized/liquidated
Number
*
establish
sector),
power
in
restructuring
mine
coal
(5 in Federation,3 in RS), satisfactory
regulatoryarrangements,beginplansfor privatization
resolutionof PBS and FIB.
Fosterincreasedprivatesectorproductiveactivityin
*
Energylaws and regulatoryagenc(ies)
*
agricultureand housing
Telecom law and regulatory agenc(ies).
*
CPI/BSI:
Reformlabor legislationto increaselabor mobility
Reform labormarketsto be more *
Labor markets.Rigidlabor
Revisedlabor legislationin Federation,
*
responsiveto the needsof a
legislationand preventslabor
new labor legislationin RS.
flexibilityandhindersfirmsfrom marketeconomy
_
Fosterprivatesectoractivity
Enablingenvironmentand
SMEs. Significantconstraintsto throughimprovedbusiness
enablingenvironment
SME activityinclude
administrativebarriers,complex
and onerousfiscalregimeand
weakjudiciaryand ruleof law, as
well as lack of accessto credit
(weak bankingsector)and onerous
laborlegislation.

Bank Group
Instruments

FIAS: Barriersto
InvestmentStudy
(FYO-01)
LaborMarketsTA and
Study (FYOO-01)
BAC (FY01)
BEF (FY00)
SOSACI (FY00)
MIGA: Guarantee
Facility (SPN)
BEEF (SPN)

EBRD, IMF,OHR,
US, Germany,Italy,
others,EU fundingof
MIGAfacility

EBPACI (SPN)
BAC (FY01),
PowerIII (FY00)
TACAP(FY01)
AgricultureII (FY02)
IFC: Wood Agency
Line (SPN)
IFC: PossibleLight
IndustryAgencyLine

EU, EBRD,US
(privatizationTA,
bankingTA, sector
reform)

LaborMarketsTA and OHR, ILO and others
Study (FYOO-01)
SOSACI (FY00)

.

In the context of the Economic Development Strategy process specific country
1 Includes both country performance indicators (CPI) and Bank Group self-evaluation indicators (BSI).
performance indicators will be identified and monitored.

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (HIGHER RANGE BASE CASE)

Overarching objective: Increase economic opportunity and improve quality of lifefor all Bosnians

Diagnosis

DevelopmentObjective
I ._ _

Strategy/Action

Performance Benchmarks'

*

Bank Group
Instruments

*

Key Activities of
Partners

Build socialsustainabilityby establishingaffordableand equitablesocialservicesand safety nets

Overall. Postwargrowthbrought Alleviatingpovertyand reducing
gains,but GDPper capita leaves vulnerability,throughdesigning
RH amongpoorest countriesin
pro-poorgrowth strategies
Europe.Nearlyone third of
populationpoor. Key
detemninants:
employmentstatus,
region,and educationlevel.
Inequality
is high. Intemallydisplaced
areparticularlyat risk.

To addressneedto increasebenefitsof growthmorebroadly,
*
preparea medium-termEconomicDevelopmentStrategy(EDS),
in broad consultationwithstakeholders(includingNGOs, labor
unions,theunemployedand the displaced),that incorporatesthe
socialprotectionstrategycurrentlyunderway.

Data. Poverty-relatedand social Improvepoverty informationand
sectordata is scarce anddata
build capacityto manage
collection
capacityis weak.
information
Safetynets. Public socialsafety Affordableand equitablesocial
net expendituresfocus on
protectionprograms
entitlementprograms,rather
supportto neediest. Overallsocial
spending
ineffectivelytargetedto
provideadequateprotection.
Donorfundshave filledthe breach,
however,arescaiing down.
Pension
and health insurance
reformareunderway,but
incomplete.
Socialservices. BH's social
Strengthenedhumancapital
serviceshave over-sizedcapacity throughimprovedgovemance
and provideoutdatedservicesand and financingof social servicesto
are not orientedto more flexible improveaccessand quality
needsof a marketeconomy.
Informalpaymentsleadto well-off
havingbetter services,poor lack
adequateservices.

*
*
*

*

*
*

*
*
*

Buildpovertydata baselinethroughhouseholdssurveys
Improvepovertyinformationmanagementcapacityof
statisticsagencies
Reorientpublicspendingon social protectiontowardthe
neediest(by reducingmilitaryspending,reduceand
streamlineveterans'benefitsand disabledprograms).
Continuepensionand health insurancereforms.

Continuegovemanceand financereformsin health care
and education.
Increaseavailabilityof vocational/adulteducationin skills
neededin a marketeconomy,especiallyto develop
entrepreneurs/managers.
Upgradeteacherskillsand improvetesting methodologies
EstablishBH-widestudentassessmentagency
Developpublichealth strategy

________
____ ____
________ ____
____

Participation.Weak "cultureof
participation,"exacerbatedby de
factoand dejure ethnic

Increasevehiclesfor
participationand build
participatoryinstruments

*

discrimination.
Environment.Pollutionfrom
Assesscurrent issuesin post
heavyindustrylowerthan prewar, conflictenvironment
butlittleenvironmentalanalysis
.

*
*

____

____

____

____

____

____

____

____

TA for EDS (FYOO-02) EU "Road Map"
TA for I-PRSP(FY01) OHRStrategy
and PRSP (FY02)
exercises
CEM (FY02)
LSMS(FY01)
PovertyAssessment
(FY02)

CPI/BSI:
*
Completionof LSMS

UNDP,Italy and
others

CPI.BSI:
*
Developmentand implemementation
of social protectionstrategies
*
Socialprotectionexpendituresshareof
budgetspending,decreasingrates of
entitlementspending,increasingrates.
for spendingon needs-basedprograms
*
Daytontargets for militaryreductions
(measuredin budgetspendingon
militarysalaries).

PER (FY01)
Various donors
SOSACI (FY00)
(Annex3)
SOSAC11(FY02)
PFSACIt (SPN)
PFSACIII (FY02)
Health/Pensions(FY02)

CPI/BSI:
*
Availabilityof studentleaming
assessmentand spendinginformation
*
Increasednon-salaryspending
*
Functioningof studentassessment
agency
*
Availabilityof health care cost
inforination

Education11(SPN)
Variousdonors
EducationRII(FY00)
(Annex3)
BasicHealth (SPN),
Health/Pensions(FY02)
SOSACI (FY00),
SOSACII (FY02)

Declining_outof pocket health_costs

____

Incorporateparticipatoryapproachesmore systematically *
into donor-fundedprojectsand AAAwork.
.
Reviewlocalissues, e.g., solidwaste management,water
Anticipateenvironmentalissuesthat mayarisewith
privatizationand newly-increasedindustrialactivity

CPI: Completionof Economic
DevelopmentStrategy(EDS)by mid
2000;maintainlinkageto PRSP
process. Present EDSto 2000
ConsultativeGroup Meeting.

*

*

BSI: Numberof projectswith
participatorytools, regular dialogue
withNGO groups.
BSI: Completionof EAP and review
with stakeholders
CPI: Incorporationof

_

_ _

_ _

_

_ _

_ _

MDP (SNP)
MunicipalServices
(FY02)
IFC microcreditbank
EAP (FY01)
Mostar Water (FY00)
Environmental

_

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

Variousdonors
(Annex3)
EU, various bilaterals
(Annex3)

Includes both country performance indicators (CPI) and Bank Group self-evaluation indicators (BSI). In the context of the Economic Development Strategy process specific country
performance indicators will be identified and monitored.

Annex B 10

CAS Summary of Development Priorities
NetworkArea
PREM
* PovertyPolicies

MajorIssue

Poor

High
Unemployment
Medium
War-relatedvulnerability
Medium
Poor-qualitystatistics
High
Fiscaladjustmentw/reduced
donorflows
High
Expendituremanagement
Domesticrevenuemobilization High
Governance/Anti-Corruption High
Low
War's impacton women

*

EconomicPolicies

Good

*

PublicSector

Fair

*

Gender

CountryPr.

Performance

Fair

BankPr

Reconciliation/Bank

High
High
High
High

Dialogue(I-PRSP-PRSP)
Dialogue(I-PRSP/PRSP)

High
High
High
Medium

_

Otherpartnersactive
UN)

_(NGOs,

HDD
* Education
*
*

Health
SocialProtection

ESSD
* RuralDevelopment
* Environment
* SocialDevelopment

FPS
* FinancialSector

Fair
Fair
Poor

Fair
Fair
Poor

Poor

*

PrivateSector

Fair

*

Energy

Good

*

Infrastructure

Good

Dialogue(EducationIII)

Educationstandards
Educationfinance
Healthfinance
Veteransbenefitsreform
Affordablepensionsbenefits
Socialprotectionstrategy

Medium
High
Medium
Medium
High
High

High
High
Medium
High
High
High

channels
Marketing/distribution
Solidwaste,sewerage
Refugeesand displaced

Medium
Medium
High

Medium
Medium
Low

Weak participation
/Discriminationlabor

Medium

High

Bankingsupervision
Paymentsbureaureform
Privateparticipationin banks
Enablingenvironment
Continueprivatizationprogram
Laborlaw
Cost recovery
SectorRegulatoryframework
Costrecovery
Rebuildinghousing

Medium
High
Medium
High
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium

Medium
High
Medium
High
High
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Low

_
Dialogue(SOSACI)

Municipalservices
Demining

Medium
High

Medium
Low

Otherpartnersactive(UN)

Dialogue(SOSACI)
_

_
Otherpartnersactive(EU,
UNHCR)
Dialogue(SOSAC1)

Otherpartnersactive(EU,
UNHCR)

MAP SECTION

IBRD28578R
l6

ZToZogreb
To Zagreb

TOZagb

18'

ToOsijek

CROATIA

D~U

ToVinkovci
To Osijek

=V

j

BOSNA ANoD

Sor

f X0'-f f t-;,
-0'

BOSNIA:
AN-D$-HEtZEGOV:iNAf
As _~- ?s
eg

o

TI

m thitq

EDfIS

s

i w] e i:

N

e

DM

w ti

s-

-

~~~~~~4'

jN..'

0

~

1.~~~i4

Y

CZECHSS

@

:0.SOEI
MTONAL

~~~~K
U00:00ol'

g1t

J

X0';X
.

:: -:X-: - -;

s

-|-

_o

Pnik

0.

CRO

To4BelgN

___adeb_

s

2OE

C

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

:
D

Lo:

<

\

|

yO -O

RMNI

;
1

-

A

t,

ROt

MDFDRP

__'

-

0

01 6 r X<3X
X-4

t>)
~ r..\-%:S3X
~ ~
-R)t

430oQ

S.
BOUNARIE

INENTOA

.r-

;

<e

Adriatic~~~~~~~~~

S

- :

-

e\

~~~~~~~

:

z

iSeaD

- -:

ms\
{
s}e;

K

qc

:

.

d-

;

/

>e
I\L

aed

~~~~~~~~~~~~eprRfhW
,

=44-

-:::eD

f:

.

~ ~~e{4ek

UGAL l

YGOSAVI

GRE

0

4<

e

rjTo

TUR50K75

403

Aqeee ,<

KILOMETERS~~~~~~~~~~~~CTOER
99

