Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 21285-BUR
MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVEDIRECTORS

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

ONA
COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY
OF THE WORLDBANK GROUP
FOR
BURKINAFASO
November 3, 2000

Country Department for Burkina Faso
AFC15
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performanceof their official duties. Its contents may not otherwisebe disclosedwithout
World Bank authorization.

CURRENCYEQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = CPA Franc (CFAF)
US$1 = 782 CFAF (October 25, 2000)

WEIGHTSAND MEASURES
Metric System

GOVERNMENTFISCALYEAR
JanuaryI - Decemnber
31

ACRONYMSAND ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
AflDB
APL
ARTEL
BCEAO
CAE
CAS
CET
CFAA
CFAF
COGES
CPI
CPIA
CPPR
DAC
ECOWAS
EMRSO
EU
FIAS
FTA
GDP
GEF
GEPRENAF
HIPC
HIV/AIDS
ICR
IDA
IDG
IFC
IMF

INSD
MIGA
MTEF
NGO
ODA
OECD
OED
OHADA
ONEA
PASECT
PER
PFP
PNGT

PNDRD
PROF
PRONAGEN
PRSC
PRSP
PSM
PSAC
RPTES
SAC
SILEM
SOFITEX
SPA
SWAP
UN
WAEMU

Analyticaland AdvisoryActivities
African DevelopnentBank
AdaptableProgramLending
Agence de Regulationdes Telecommunications
Banque Centraledes Etarsde I'Afriquede l'Ouest
CountryAssistanceEvaluation
CountryAssistanceStrategy
ConmnonExternalTariff
CountryFinancialAccountabilityAssessment
CFA Franc
Comitesde Gestion
ConsumerPrice Index
CountryPolicyand InstitutionalAssessment
CountryPortfolioPerformanceReview
DevelopmentAssistanceCommnittee
(OECD)
EconomicConmiissionfor West Africaa States
Economnic
Managenment
ReformSupportOperation
EuropeanUnion
ForeignInvestmnt AdvisoryServices
Free TradeArea
Gross DomesticProduct
GlobalEnvironmentFacility
GestionParticipativedes RessourcesNaturelleset de la Faune
Highly IndebtedPoor Countries
Human hlinunodeficiencyVirusAcquired Imenunodeficiency
Syndrome
LIplenentation Conpletion Report
InternationalDeveloprent Association
InternationalDeveloprmentGoals
IntemationalFinanceCorporation
InternationalMonetaryFund
Institut Nationalde Statistiqueset Demographie
MultilateralInvestmentGuaranteeAgency
MediumTermExpenditureFramework
Non-GovernmentalOrganization
OfficialDevelopmnent
Assistance
Organizationfor Economnic
Cooperationand Developmnent
OperationsEvaluationDepartment(WorldBank)
Organisationpour I'Harmonisationdu Droitdes Affairesen Afrique
OfficeNationalde l'Eau
ProjetdtAjustenrentSectorieldes Transports
PublicExpenditureReview
PoticyFrameworkPaper
Programme National de Gestion des Te,roirs
ProgrammeNationalde DeveloppementRuralD&centrafisi
PovertyReduction& Growth Facility
Progranme Nationalde Gestionde l'Ecoasteme Naturel
PovertyReductionSupportCredit
PovertyReductionStrategy Paper
PublicSector Management
ProgramnuticStrctural Adjustrent Credit
RegionalProgramn
for theTraditionalEnergySector
StructuralAdjustmentCredit
SahelIntegratedLow LandEcosystemManagerment
Societedes Fibres Textilesdu BurkinaFaso
SpecialProgramfor Africa
Sector WideApproach
UnitedNations
West AfricanEconomic& MonetaryUnion
Vice-President
Country Director
Sector Manager
Task Team Leader

Callisto Madavo
Hasan Tuluy
Charles Humphreys
Celestin Monga

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BURKINA FASO

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page No.
EXECUTIVESUMMARY
INTRODUCTION
POLICY FRAMEWORK

I.
A.
B.

BURKINA PASO'S DEVELOPMENTCHALLENGESAND THE GOVERNMENT'SPRSP
MEDIUM-TERMMACROECONOMICFRAMEWORK

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCESTRATEGY

II.
A.
B.
C
D.

m.

PROGRESS UNDER LAST CAS AND LESSONS LEARNED
CAS RATIONALE AND STRATEGICAPPROACH
COUNTRY ASSISTANCEPROGRAM
VEHICLES FOR BANK ASSISTANCE,ALTERNATIVESCENARIOSAND CONTINGENCIES

KEY ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING THE CAS
MONITORING OF OUTCOMES
COLLABORATIONWITH OTHER DEVELOPMENTPARTNERS

IV. RISKS

(i)
1
1
1
3

7
7
8
10
16

23
23
24

25

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosedwithout
World Bank authorization.

MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVEDIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCESTRATEGY
FOR BURKINAFASO

TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont'd)
TEXT TABLES
* Table 1: Selected Indicators
* Table 2: Scenario of Moderate Growth - Selected Indicators, 1999-2005
* Table 3: High Growth Scenario - Selected Indicators, 1999-2005
* Table 4: Base Case Assistance Program, FY 2001-2003
• Table 5: Triggers and Main Assumptions for Lending Program Composition
* Table 6: Proposed Core Benchmarks during CAS Period
BOX TABLES
* Box 1: OED Country Assistance Evaluation
* Box 2: Client Feedback Survey
• Box 3: Bank Group Portfolio (FY01)
* Box 4: Inprovements in Governanceand Fight Against Corruption
* Box 5: Rationale for PRSC in Burkina Faso
ATTACHMENTS
* 1. Constraints to Growth and Poverty Reduction
* 2. Burkina Faso's Poverty Profile
* 3. Key Structural Reforms Implementedunder Previous CAS
* 4. Econometric Model for Macroeconomic Simulations
i
5. CAS Formulation: A Participatory Process
- 6. Burkina Faso's Gender Profile
77. Collaboration with Development Partners
- 8. Performance MonitoringFramework
- 9. Combating HIV/AIDS
* 10. Core Labor Standards
ANNEXES
* A2: Burkina Faso at a Glance
* B 1: CAS Matrix 2000-2003
* B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
* B3: Bank Group Program Summary:IDA
* B3: IFC and MIGA Program
* B4: Sunmmaryof Nonlending Services
B5: Social Indicators
* B6: Key Economic Indicators
B7: Key Exposure Indicators
* B8: Status of Bank-GroupOperations
* B8: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
MAP IBRD 28673

MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVEDIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY
FOR BURKINAFASO

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

BurkinaFaso is a poor landlockedcountrywith a limited resourcebase, high vulnerabilityto
1.
externalshocks,and acute social needs. With a populationof nearly 12 million growing at about 2.8
percent per annum,BurkinaFaso's real GNP per capita was US$230in 1999.Given its narrow tax
base and structural Government budget deficit, the country has traditionally benefited from
substantialexternal aid flows(officialdevelopmentassistancereceivedrepresentedabout 13 percent
of GDP over the last five years). Burkina Faso established a good track record on prudent
macroeconomic management and structural reforms during the last CAS period (FY97-00).
However, the country has been unable to attract levels of foreign direct investment necessary to
increase employmentand incomes, owingto poor economicinfrastructureand high transactionand
input costs, low labor productivityand a large social deficit,the limited size of the modern economy,
and severalimportantinstitutionalweaknesses.
Objectives. Despite BurkinaFaso's average GDP growth of 5.7 percent during 1996-99,45
2.
percent of the populationremainspoor and more than two-fifthslive in extremepoverty.Thecentral
objectiveof the CAS is to support the Government'sefforts as describedin the PRSP to achieve
sustainedhigh growth rates, to reduce the high incidenceof poverty, and to improve the nutrition,
health, and educationof the rural population,which constitutes the largest group among the poor.
Specifically,the CAS seeks to help the Governmentreduce the povertyheadcountratio by at least 2
percentagepoints per year during2000-2003.
Approach.While building on the positive developmentoutcomes achievedover the last four
3.
years, this CAS
* incorporates the results of intensive analytical work and discussions with the Burkinabe
authoritieson the causes of povertyand the challengesof higher,sustainablegrowth.
* focuses on the areas critical for the poor (education,health, water supply, rural development)
and on increasingtheir accessto basic publicservices.
* addresses key cross-cutting issues of capacity building, gender, decentralization, and the
environment.
* recommends a progressive shift from project support towards program supportto further the
strategic,efficient, and equitableuse of public resources, regardlessof source.
* acknowledgesthat efficientuse of IDA administrativeresourcesimplieshigh sectoral selectivity.
Proposedprogram. The CAS will focus on (i) supportingpolicies and programs aimed at
4.
improving the supply side of the economy to allow for sustained,broad-basedand export-oriented
growth; (ii) improving public finance management to ensure that Government revenues are
mobilizedwithout distortingthe modern sector of the economy,and (iii) ensuringthat the allocative
processand the effectivenessof public spendingwill place special emphasison social services.With
respect to the latter, the CAS will contribute to closing the social deficit by supporting ten-year
programsin educationand health as well as effortsto aggressivelyfightHIWV/AIDS.
The proposed base case lending level of $400-420million for 11 operations(compared to
-5.
$205-260million and 8 operationsunder the previous CAS) assumes:(i) continued maintenanceof
i

good macroeconomicenvironment;(ii) satisfactoryimplementationof the reformprogramin the key
povertyreducing sectors presentedin the PRSP; (iii) enhancedexternal and internal competitiveness
through concrete actions to liberalize utilities and reduce input and factor costs as outlined in the
PRSP; (iv) improved transparencyand accountabilityin public finance management as outlined in
the PRSP; and (v) continuedsatisfactoryportfolioperformance. The high case lending would be
triggeredby: (i) major improvementsin public financemanagement,includingthe implementationof
institutionalreforns and budgetaryproceduresthat will make the system more efficient and budget
management more expeditious, reliable, transparent, consistent, and accountable; (ii) swift
implementation of the private sector development strategy, including completion of the utilities
reform program;and (iii) increasein the absorptivecapacityfor public funds,as demonstratedby the
speed and level of implementationof priority public expenditureprograms. Triggers for low-case
lending would include failure to effectivelyimplement the reform agenda outlined in the PRSP and
maintainmacroeconomicstability,and sustaineddeclinein portfolioperformance.
6.
CAS Risks. The implementationof the Bank's proposedassistancestrategy faces three types
of risks: (i) deterioration of the external environment; (ii) weak institutional capacity; and (iii)
political risks. In our assessment,these risks aremanageable.The Bank will take all necessarysteps
describedin the CAS to mitigatethem.
7.
The followingissuesare suggestedfor Boarddiscussion:
* Are the scale and compositionof the proposedprogram appropriateresponsesto Burkina
Faso's developmentneeds and do theyreflect the Bank's comparativeadvantage?
* Is the proposedset of core benchmarksfor monitoringand evaluatingthe implementation
of the CAS adequate?

ii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BURKINA FASO

INTRODUCTION
The Government of Burkina Faso has been implementing since 1991 a wide range of
1.
economic reforms under a series of stabilization and structural adjustment programs supported by the
Bank, the IMF and other donors. In 1995, it issued a Letter of Intent for Sustainable Human
Development Policy, which laid down its vision of the country for 1995-2005. The vision consists of
transforning Burkina Faso from one of the poorest countries in Sub-Saharan Africa into a middleincome one with a dynamic private sector open to the world economy. However, the authorities now
recognize that, in spite of its stabilization record, Burkina Faso will not be able to reduce poverty and
meet the 2015 International Development Goals (IDG), unless the country accelerates the pace of
reforms to liberalize and open up the economy. The recently completed Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP - IDA/Sec/M2000-313) discussed at the Board on June 30, 2000 presents the agenda for
a new, more ambitious course of action that would lead to higher growth rates and substantial
poverty reduction.
The last CAS was discussed by the Board in
2.
Indicators
Table1:Selected
June 1996 (15740-BUR). This CAS is designed as the
AverageAverageEstimate
Bank business plan for FY01-03 to support Burkina
(199294) (1995-97)(1999)
Faso's PRSP. Thus, this CAS: (i) reflects the results of
10.6 11.6
9.8
(million):
Population
intensive analytical work and discussions with the
2.8
2.8
2.8
Growth(%):
Burkinabe authorities on the causes of poverty and Population
2.8
2.4
2.6
the challenges of higher, sustainable growth; (ii) GDP($billion):
230
230
220
GNPper capita($):
focuseso the.areascriticalforthepoor(education,
3.7

4.9

5.8

focuses on the areas critical for the poor (education,

GDPGrowth(%):

health, water, rural development) and on increasing
their access to basic public services; (iii) addresses
the key cross-cutting issues of capacity building,
gender, and the environment; and (iv) recommends a
progressive shift from project support towards

FiscalDeficiVGDP(%): -7.7 -7.9 -12.3
-1.1
4.6
0.4
Inflation(CPI)(%):
-16.2
7.5
0.3
ExportGrowth(%)
livingbelow$1/day:45%
% of Population

program

support in order to futher

the strategic,

efficient, and equitable use of all public resources,
The CAS incorporates
whatever their source.
results-oriented
and
outcomequantitative,
benchmarks to better monitor and fine-tune the
assistance program and its effectiveness.

I.
A.

Litercy Rate:
GrossPrimaryEnrollment:
Ferrle PriraryEnrollment:

furthr the stategic,Fenmale LiteracyRate:
in orderto
InfantMortality:

Life Expectancy at Bith (y33%
of {IIV/AIDS:
Prevalence

19%
9%
41%
34%

105 per1000
6.4%

POLICY FRAMEWORK

BURKINA FASO'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND THE GOVERNMENT'S PRSP

A Strong Analytical Base. Recently, considerable analysis has been undertaken and open
3.
debate has occurred over Burkina Faso's growth prospects. In 1999, the Government commissioned

a comprehensiveanalysis of competitivenessand long-termsources of growth in the country. The
findingsserved as the basis of a workshopin Ouagadougouin May 1999with the participationof the
Government,the Bank, donors,the private sector, and civil society. A special Cabinet meetingwas
later convened by the Head of State. The study Burkina Faso: Competitivite et Croissance
Economique-Orientations, Strategieset Actions was completedin early 2000, and identified four
major constraintsto growth (see Attachment 1): (i) a depleted social and human capital base, low
labor productivity,and high unemployment;(ii) weak physicalinfrastructure,high input costs, anda
small modem private sector; (iii) severely constrained institutional capacity; and (iv) a relatively
closed economy,exportingonly small amountsof raw material and labor.
4.
The PRSP is based on a solid understandingof the nature and locus of poverty in Burkina
Faso. In 1996 and 2000, the Governmentissued two povertyprofiles drawing from the results of
Priority Surveys conducted in 1994 and 1998. BurkinaFaso is one of the few francophoneWest
African countriesthat have producedcomparablesurveysto analyzepoverty trends over a five-year
period. The availability of these data has allowed poverty outcomes to be measured and the
relationship between poverty and key determinants-geography, family composition,gender, and
occupation-to be better understood.
5.
Poverty Profile. The survey findings indicate that poverty is a widespreadphenomenonin
BurkinaFaso, and that 45.3 percent of the population(see Table 1) currentlylives below the absolute
poverty line of approximatelyCFAF 72,690 per year (compared to 44.5 percent in 1994 with a
povertyline of CFAF41,099)1.Povertyis particularlyprevalentin rural areas,althoughits incidence
in urban areas increased by five points from 1994 to 1998, reaching 16 percent in 1998 (see
Attachment2).
6.
The participatory surveys of the perceptions of the poor regarding poverty reveal that the
situationdiffers dependingon where the respondentslive. The key factors for the urban poor are, in
order of importance,climate-relatedhazards,low purchasingpower, old age, and large family size.
Poor people in rural areas, however, attribute their situation mainly to lack of economic
opportunities,physical handicaps,and social decay. Theregional analysisof poverty showsthat the
poverty map in Burkina Faso changedbetween 1994 and 1998.Although the incidence of poverty
decreasedsignificantly(by nearly eightpercentagepoints)in the southern,southeastern,and northern
agro-climaticregions,the south-centralregion experiencedan increaseof four percentagepoints. The
analysis of poverty among socioeconomicgroups (based on source of income) shows that the
incidenceof poverty is increasingfor all groupsexcept cash crop farmersand inactive persons. It is
highestamongfood crop farmers,who accountfor most of the populationliving in poverty.
7.
Main Pillars of the PRSP and Staff Assessment. The PRSP acknowledgesthat sustainable
povertyreductionrequiresnot only rapid growth,but growththat offers increasedaccess to economic
opportunity by the poor and growth that is environmentallysound. It also depends on good
governancethat ensures transparencyand the fair distributionof the benefits of growth. The PRSP
outlines and prioritizes the Government'spoverty reductionstrategy that aims to intervene in four
areas: (i) acceleratingbroad-basedgrowth; (ii) ensuring that the poor have access to basic social
services;(iii) expandingopportunitiesfor employmentand income-generatingactivities for the poor;
and (iv) promotinggood governance.In each area, the documentdescribesthe specific actions that
the Govermnentintends to take over the medium term to overcome the severe constraints.The
1The poverty line per year and per capita, based on household expenditures, was estimated at CFAF 41,099 (equivalent to
US$74) in 1994 and updated to CFAF 72,690 (equivalent to US$123) in 1998. In real terms, these two amounts of money allow
the acquisition of the same basket of goods. The sizeable increase in the poverty line is due to the CFA franc devaluation in early
- 1994, which has made the basic basket of goods more expensive (the 1994 poverty line was determined on the basis of 1993
costs).
2

action plan focuses on three priority sectors-education, health, and rural development-where
public interventionstraditionallyhave had the highestpayoffin terns of fosteringeconomicgrowth,
increasingemploymentopportunities,and raisingthe Burkinabestandardof living.
8.

The Government'scoreobjectivesfor 2005canbe summarizedas follows:
* to raise GDPper capita,at a minimum,by 3 percentannually;
* to reduce the headcountpovertyindexfrom 45.3 percentto less than 35 percent;
* to raise the literacyrate from 19 to 40 percent;
* to increase life expectancyto 57 years.

9.
The Government's poverty reduction strategy is appropriate to Burkina Faso's current
circumstancesand provides a sound basis on which to elaborate the Bank's assistance strategy. It
candidlyidentifiesthe causes of poverty,and correctlyfocuseson key sectoralstrategies that would
have the highest impact on poverty alleviation.The relationshipbetween poverty and geography,
family composition,gender,occupationand otherkey determinantsare well understood.The action
plan focuses on three priority sectors:health, education,and rural development.This emphasisis
consistentwith the findingof the competitivenessstudythat human capital and rural productivityare
key constraintsto growth. The monitoringand evaluationsystem put in place by the Governmentis
appropriate.The costing of the PRSP action plan is consideredreliable because it draws upon the
long-term strategies under finalizationin priority sectors and on the preliminary work done, in
cooperationwith Bank staff, on the 2001-2003medium-termexpenditureframework.New spending
priorities are consistent with Burkina Faso's limited implementation capacity and with noninflationary finance. The PRSP considers the scope for reallocation of spending, increasing its
efficiencyand raisingnew revenuein a non-distortionarymanner,as well as scope for more extemal
assistance.The use of HIPC resourcesis clearlypresented.
10. While the povertyreductionstrategyas thewhole is consideredsound,there are someelements
of concemto staff, which are the topic of ongoingdialoguewith the authorities:(i) the PRSPprojects
real GDP growth rates of over 7 percent a year in 2001-03, which would be unprecedented-the
Burkinabe authoritiesacknowledgethat they would have to implementswiftly an ambitiousreform
agenda to reach that goal; (ii) the PRSP contains limited analysisof why public service quality is
low,unit costshigh and outcomesdisappointing-the Governmentrecognizesthis weaknessand has
just completeda series of PER studiesin the socialsectorsand expectsto use the findingsto address
these questions;and (iii) the need to ensuresystematicconsultationdirectlywith the poor. This is to
be completedthroughthe preparationof a participatorypovertyassessment,with technicalassistance
from the Bank in 2001. The Governmentplans to update the PRSP annuallyto take into account the
lessonslearned from the implementationof policiesadopted,the findingsof complementarystudies
carriedout by various institutionsto gain a better grasp of the povertyphenomenon,and the evolving
resourceframework.
B.

MEDIUM-TERMMACROECONOMICFRAMEWORK

EconomicPerformanceunderthe PreviousCAS
11.
Between 1996 and 1999, real GDP grew on average by 5.7 percent annually despite a
significant deterioration in the terms of trade over the period. The relatively strong growth
performanceis attributableto the competitivenessgains followingthe 1994 CFA franc devaluation,
to the large public investment program, and to the financial and structural policies aimed at
consolidatingthe market orientation of the economy and maintaining macroeconomicstability.
Activity in the manufacturingsector, in particular the cotton ginning industry, was boosted in the
1996-98period by a strong increasein cotton productionfrom 150,000tons in 1995/96to 338,000
3

tons in 1997/98.In 1998/99,cottonproductiondeclinedto 284,500 tons in responseto unfavorable
environmental conditions and remained broadly stable in 1999/2000.Despite a sharp decline in
internationalprices in 1999, the ginning and marketingcompany (SOFITEX)was able to avoid
lossesby improvingquality and reducingcosts.Reflectingstrongpublic investment(which averaged
almost 14 percent of GDP in 1996-99),the constructionand public work sectors also supported
growththroughoutthe period, togetherwith services,which grew on averageby 6 percent annually.
Inflation on an annual basis, as measuredby the GDP deflator, declinedfrom 6 percent in 1996 to
2 percent on average,between 1997and 1999.
12.
Govermmentrevenue rose during the last CAS period from 12.3percent of GDP (1996) to
13.5percent of GDP (1999)despitelosses causedby the reduction of externaltariff rates associated
with the introduction of the West African Economicand Monetary Union (WAEMU)common
externaltariff (CET).For all three years, the currentprimarybalanceexceededthe PRGFtargets,and
effortswere made to redirectspendingto socialsectors.The level of public capitalspending,mainly
externallyfinanced,hoveredbetween 12 and 16percentof GDP over the period.
13.
After declining between 1996 and 1997, the external current account deficit,excluding
grants, rose in 1998 and 1999 by 1.5 percentagepoints of GDP to 16 percent of GDP, due to an
increase in imports in 1998 (the result of a rise in spendingthrough the capital budget and private
investment) and lower-than-expectedcotton exports in 1999. This slightly higher deficit was
financedby foreignreserves,withoutresortingto externalarrears. Structuralreformsundertaken
in 1996-2000are summarizedinAttachment 3. Implementationof these reforms has not,however,
led to any significantchange in the structureof BurkinaFaso's economy,which is still dependenton
few primaryproductexports.
14. Sources of Growth. The key factors in building the growth momentum during the 199499 period were the January 1994 devaluation,the public investment ratio, averaging 14 percent
of GDP in 1996-99, and the sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms under
successive adjustment programs, which improved the environment for private sector activities.
Recent studies indicate that in order for BurkinaFaso to achieve its PRSP goals, the Govemment
would need to continue to liberalize the economy, improve external competitiveness, and
develop the country's economicand social infrastructure.
15. The agriculturalsector,which contributesabout31 percent of GDP at currentprices, was the
main source of growth.It grew by 3.1 percent in 1999in real terms (5.5 percent in 1998).Following
a record increase of 17 percent in crop year 1998-99,the cereals output increased further by 1.6
percent in 1999to reach 2.7 milliontons. Growthin the primary sectorwas due to a combinationof
factors, including structural reforms and changes in sectoral policies that helped raise farrners'
income and improvedprofitability-especially in the cotton sector. Livestock,numberingabout 20
million heads of cattle, forestryand fishing continuedto grow at a broadlystable rate. There is scope
to increase production substantiallyin cotton and cereals, provided that farmers acquire essential
tools and have accessto financing.Thereis also scopeto expandsignificantlyproductionand exports
of fruits and vegetables,includingmangos,sesame,and sheanuts.
16. Cotton will remain Burkina Faso's main export commodity in the medium tern. Cotton
exports, after a very rapid growth in 1995-98when they more than doubled,reflecting improved
incentivesto producers, are projectedto expandat a more moderatepace of 6 percent per year in
1999-2004. Exportgrowth potentialis presentfor fruits, vegetables,and productsthat can be used
by the pharmaceuticalindustry. There is also a potential for developmentof the exports of hides,
skins and leather, as well as of gold and other minerals. Gold exports are projected to increase
substantially,owing to the intenseexplorationscurrentlyunder way. The growth in exportvolume is
predicatedhowever on someprice recovery. Thereshouldbe scope for developingtextiles and light
4

manufacturing directed to satisfy regional demand provided Burkina Faso improves its
competitiveness.Nontraditionalexportsareprojectedto growrapidly from a low base.
LinkagesbetweenGrowth,Consumption,and Poverty
17.
Burkina Faso's strong economicperformanceover the last six years has not translatedinto
increasedwelfare and poverty reduction.Poverty incidence,as measured by the headcount index,
has not been reduced during 1994-98(45.3 percentin 1998,comparedto 44.5percent in 1994).Two
importantmacro links betweenpoverty,as measuredby consumption-basedwelfare and income per
capita,need to be considered.First, because inequalityishigh in BurkinaFaso, there are important
distributionaldifferencesamong income and socioeconomicgroups.Also, little correlation exists
between aggregateconsumptionindicators and consumptionin the three lowest income quintilesthe poorest provinces.Accordingto studies by the INSD,the 1994 devaluationand the subsequent
structuralreformshave raisedliving standardsfor cottonproducers,especiallyin the South-West,but
mayhave increasedurban poverty.
18.
Second, cross-sectionalanalysesindicate that, on average,increased consumptionper capita
of 1 percent is associated with a decline in the poverty headcount ratio of about 1 percent. This
suggeststhat policies that lead to an increasein aggregateconsumptionare likely to lead to a decline
in the poverty headcount ratio. In BurkinaFaso, the link between aggregateoutput per capita and
consumptionper capita is complex.Therefore,the reformprogram under considerationwill reflect
analysesof (i) the determinantsof aggregateconsumption;(ii) the welfare effectsof reforms;(iii) the
impact of changes in relative prices, terms of trade, and domestic absorptionof foreign financing;
and (iv) the nature of savings and public expenditurepolicies in a countrywith high inequalityin
income distribution.The next stage of analysiswill look at sector specific income distributionand
the impactof differentgrowthpatternson improvinglivingstandards.
ModelingGrowthScenarios
19.
An econometric model was built in close collaborationwith the Government's economic
team to design an appropriatemix of fiscal, monetary,and public investmentpolicies that would
bring the economyto a highergrowthpathwhile maintainingan adequatelevel of consumption.
20.
Scenarioof Moderate Growth. On the basis of the assumptionsprovidedin Attachment4,
simulationresultsindicate that real GDPgrowthcouldaverage4.5 percentper annumover the period
2000-05,while the GDP deflatorwill stabilizebelow the WAEMUtarget at about 2.4 percent on
average. At the annual real GDP growth rate of about 4.5 percent and given the current
elasticityof povertyreductionwithrespectto meanincome(about 1.5), BurkinaFaso's poverty
will decreaseonly by 16 percent(about7 percentagepoints)and the countrywill not meet the
2015 ODA-OECDtargets.2 Also, this scenariocarrieswith it a significantdownsiderisk. Because
cottonremains the main exportcrop, the Burkinabeeconomywill remain vulnerableto climatic and
termsof trade shocks.In the caseof a serious adverseexternalshock,real GDP growthrate may fall
below the population growth rate, which could fuel poverty and worsen domestic and external
imbalances.

2With its population growingat 2.8 percent a year, a real GDP growth rate of 4.5 imnpliesan increase in GDP per capita of 1.7
percent.Assuming an elasticity of poverty with respect to income of 1.5, this would translate into a reduction of 2.6 percent per
year of the headcount index, that is 1.2 points from the current 45.3 percent.

5

Table 2: Scenario of moderategrowth: Selected Indicators, 1999-2005
2001
4.9
2.8

2003
4.9
2.8

2005
4.3
2.8

2.1

2.1

1.5

45.3
I4.4

1.5
3.1
42.5
1.5

1.5
3.1
40.0
2.3

-1213
-165

-12
-12

-12

1.5
2.2
38.2
2.4
-12
-12

19991(6cttial)
Real GDP growth rate (annualpercentage

5.8
2.8
3.0

change)

Populationgrowthrate (annualpercentage change)
Real GDP per capita (annual percentage change)
Poverty elasticity in Burkina Faso with respect to mean income
Expected reduction in headcount ratio (% per year)
Poverty headeount ratio
GDP deflator (annualpercentage change)
Fiscal deficit (in percentage of GDP, excluding grants)
Current account deficit (in percentage of GDP, excl grants)

21.

Rationale

Government's

for

a High

Growth

Scenario.

The

1,5

PRSP

-11

acknowledges

that

achieving

the

poverty reduction objectives will require a new policy framnework. Keeping in mind

that the Government's

revenue

capacity

remains

donors would be called upon to maintain

very low (and unlikely

to change in the near future),

high aid flows to Burkina Faso (provided

that the

authorities keep their commitment to reform). To achieve higher growth rates over the mediumterm-a GDP growth rate of 7 percent a year-the Burkinabe authorities recognize that they must
implement an aggressive structural reform program to remove constraints to private sector
development and to accelerate the pace of Burkina Faso's integration into the regional and world
economy. This will include diversifying the economy; investing in human resources; reducing the
high costs of electricity, telecommunications and transport; improving the taxation system; and
deepening financial intermediation.
22.
In this bold scenario, and on the basis of assumptions provided in Attachment 4, simulation
results indicate that real GDP growth could rise steadily over the period 2000-2005 to reach 7.7
percent, while the GDP deflator is contained at about 2.6 percent. With a poverty elasticity of
about 1.5, the poverty headcount ratio would be reduced by about 30 percent (15 points).
Stronger export performance may also lead to a significant improvement in the overall deficit and the
current account balance (excluding grants) between 1999 and 2005, as shown in Table 3 below.
Table 3: High Growth Scenario: SelectedIndicators, 1999-2005
Real GDP growth rate (annual percentage change)
Population growth rate (annual percentage change)
Real GDP per capita (annual percentage change)
Poverty elasticity in Burkina Faso with respect to mean income
Expected reduction in headcount ratio (% per year)
Poverty headeount ratio
GDP deflator (annual percentage change)
Fiscal deficit (in percentage of GDP, excluding grants)
Current account deficit (in percentage of GDP, excl. grants)

6

: 199W(actual) I
5.8
:

2.8-7
3.07
L1.5l
4S.3:

-1.4
-12.3
16

1

2001
6.3
2.8
3.5
1.5
5.2
40.5
1.5
-12

-11

2003
7.6
2.8
4.8
1.5
7.2
34.7
1 2.4

-10
-10

2005
7.7
2.8
4.9
1.5
7.3
29.6
2.6
-10.0
-9.0

II.
A.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

PROGRESS UNDER LASTCAS AND LESSONSLEARNED

23.
Progress towards Objectives in
Previous CAS. The last CAS which was
BoxE1:OED Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE)
th
by onn July
1, 1996
In 1999OED
comnpleted
discussed bydiscussd
the Board
Board
July 11,
1996 program
in Burkina
Faso.a CountryAssistanceEvaluationof IDA's
(R96-140) supported three objectives: . While the focus of IDA's program over the past decade was
maintaining a stable macroeconomic
deemed generally appropriate, the overall outcome was rated
environment, providing social services to
marginally satisfactory despite somne iniportant successes,
the poor and creating sustainable income,
and key parastatals, reorientation of primary education
employment, and growth opportunities.
system, strengthening of capacity to build and mnaintainurban
Progresswas made under the first objective
infrastructure, and of agricultural services, and the extent of
as notedin paras 11-13.Data indicatea poor
beneficiaryparticipation.
Support of structural adjustment with closely integrated
record in the second objective: despite
projects in key sectors was found broadly relevant, but too
important economic achievements, and
ambitious given institutional capacity and political instability,
although much has been done to promote
slow process in reaching consensus around private
essentialbasic social services,BurkinaFaso *participation
the economy.
e Privatization, incivil
service reform, and trade and price
still suffers from a large social deficit. In
liberalizationwere judged to be partial successes Little
reference to the third objective, some
progress was noted howeverin private sector development,
progress was made in liberalizing and
rationalizationof the pubLicinvestmentprogram,
decentralizationof public health services and in supportto dry
opening up the economy. However, the
land agriculture.
population has grown faster than the . Coordination arnongBurkina Faso's main donors wasjudged
economy's capacity to generate additional
inadequateand a framework for integrating extemal assistance
income. In addition, growth opportunities
was absentwhich weakenedthe policy impact of the country
dialogue.
are still hamperedby low laborproductivity, . These fndings have been shared with the authorities and the
now further threatenedby HIV/AIDS,high
lessonstaken into accountin preparing this CAS.
input and factor costs, weak organizational
and institutionalsettings for efficientsocial
servicedelivery,and poor donorcoordination.
24.
What Worked Well. The Bank's adjustment operations-a one tranche Economic
ManagementReform Credit in FY99, followedby a one tranche SAC III in FYOO-workedwell to
improveBurkinaFaso's public financemanagementand resourcemobilization.The last three Public
Expenditure Reviews (PERs) were successful and a medium-term expenditure framework is
currently in place. The Public InstitutionalDevelopmentCredit (closed in FY00) supported the
computerizationand on-linemanagementof publicfinance (includingTreasury)and the civil service.
Reforms under the Transport Adjustment Credit (closed in FY00) have led to the successful
implementationof road maintenancewith regular budgetallocations.Two urban operations-Urban
II (closedin FY97) and UrbanEnvironment(undersupervision)increasedprivate sector participation
and domesticresourcemobilization.The EducationIV Credit(closedin FY99), and the Post-Primary
Education Credit (under supervision) contributed to the strengthening of institutions and
infrastructureto promote quality and access, most notably in primary education.Progress was also
made in liberalizingthe telecommunicationssector,with the issuance of two new cellular licenses
and the creationof a regulatoryagency(ARTEL).Privatizationof Air Burkinais well advanced.
25.
What Worked Less Well. Implementationof the privatization program under the Private
SectorAssistanceCredit (closedin FY00) moved slowerthan anticipatedas the processfocussedon
transactionsrather than on an articulationof a strategiccontext.However,the situationturnedaround
in the last year of implementation, during which the project supported the preparation and
disseminationof a major study on competitivenessand economicgrowthin BurkinaFaso.
7

26.
What Did Not Work Well. In several sectors,
the Bank and the Governmentcame to no agreement
on the content and pace of reforms. For example,
reforms to liberalize trade and prices of cereals,
livestock,and cash crops (e.g., cotton)have still not
been agreed upon. The second Agriculture
Adjustment credit was cancelled during preparation
(March 98) due to continued disagreement with
Government on the reform agenda. Rationalization of

Govemiment on the reform agenda. Rationalization of

the public investmentprogram, too, was incomplete
largely due to weak donor coordination.Utilities and
air transport costs have not been reduced; the
economicbenefits of slower population growth and
the challenge of AIDS were not sufficiently
emphasizedin the dialoguewith the Government.

Box2: ClientFeedbackSurvey
A survey was conducted in December 1997 and
provided lessons
can help the Bank strengthen its
relationship withthat
the Governrnent
and other donors.
The survey noted that Bank staff need to reach out and
listen more. Feedback also suggests that Bank staff
need to be mnoreproactive in detecting and resolving
imnplementationissues. The survey confirmed strong
Bank-Government relations, especially at senior
Governmentlevels. During CPPR preparation, project
units recently noted long delays in processing of no-

objections, high level of Bank staff rotation at
Headquarters which has negative effect on project
imnplementation,poor planning of Bank missions, and
too heavy reliance on consultants with limited
experience.

27.
Portfolio Management. Gross IDA disbursements fell
below planned levels in the late 1990s because of the failure to
reach agreementon sectoral reformsin agricultureand in response
to weak implementationcapacity. As of November1, 2000, there
were seven activeprojects in the Bank's portfolioin BurkinaFaso,
totaling $186 million, of which $87 million was undisbursed,
significantlylower thanthe 15 projectstotalingUS$372millionin
FY97. While a number of projectsclosed in the latter part of the
1996-2000CAS period, emphasis was placed on building the
analytical base, with economic and sector work undertaken in
education, health, decentralization, public finance and
infrastructure. Portfolioperformanceover the last several years
has been mixed, but generally satisfactory. At the time of the

Box 3: Bank Group
Portfolio(UJS$m)
(FY01)
11AConmitmnents
Number of Projects
Sectoral Composition (%)
Agriculture
Health
Education
Mining
Urban
IDA Undisbursed (US$m)
MIGA Outstanding (US$m)
IFC Exposure (US$m)
IFC Number of Projects

186
7
25
30
14
11
20
87
0
2.05
3

__I

second CPPR (May 1998), there were four problem projects in the portfolio and one at present
(Private Irrigation). The disbursementratio has been steadyover the years at about 20 percent. The
proactivity index was low (50 percent in FY98, 33 percent in FY99) but has improved and is
currentlyat 100percent. The realism indexis at 100%.
28.
Future Portfolio Actions. The following actions were discussed during the March 2000
CPPR to further improve portfolio management, to be implemented during the upcoming CAS
period:
* improve the pace of disbursementsby movingconditionsof effectivenessto conditionsof
negotiationsduringproject preparation;
* resolve the issue of repeated delays in transfer of funds by BCEAO and all commercial
banks; and
* improvethe rate of timelysubmissionof auditreports.
B.

CAS RATIONALE AND STRATEGIC APPROACH

29. Objectives. The thrust of theBank's futureprogramis to assist BurkinaFaso in implementing
its PovertyReduction Strategy.The overridingobjectivewill be to supportthe Government'sefforts
to achieve sustained high growth rates, to reduce the high incidence of income poverty, and to
improve the nutrition, health, and educationof rural population-poorest segment of the population.
Specifically,the CAS seeks to help the Government reduce the poverty headcount ratio by at
8

least2 percentagepointsper yearduring2000-2003.To achievethis goal, the CAS will focuson
the four objectivesof the PRSPas noted in paragraph7. There is no substantialdivergencebetween
the Bank's and the Government'sdevelopmentagendas,priorities,and policies.
30. Selectivity and Flexibility. Bank interventionin support of the PRSP is intended to be
selectiveand complementaryof activitiessupportedby other donors.In line with the OED findings
and recommendations,we have developeda strategywith two key prongs:bringingresourcescloser
to the beneficiaries,where they are most likely to be productivelyused; and collectivedonor action
to reduce mismanagementand inefficiencies.To these ends, the Bank will support: (i) greater
participationof local stakeholdersin program and project design and implementation;(ii) closer
cooperationamongdonorsto link improvedgovernanceand donorlendinglevels.
31. The Bank will work closely with other donors to ensure consistencyin the country policy
dialogue,and a divisionof labor in lending and nonlendingservices.For example in education,the
Bank is taking the lead in the reform effort and in basic education,whilesome bilateral agenciesare
focusingmore on physicalrehabilitationof schoolsand secondaryeducation;in health, the Bank is
takingthe lead in advisingthe Governmenton thepreparationof the ten-yearreform plan,with other
development agencies complementingthese efforts through physical investments and specific
thematicprograms.In transport,the Bank is not contemplatingnew operationsin main road network
development,but will support maintenanceand rural roads development. On judicial reform, the
Bank will work in parallel with others donorsto help the Governmentfinalizeits action plan but the
EU will take the lead in supportingthe implementationphase. Thepriorities for theBank's assistance
program vis-a-vis other donors have been determined through our country dialogue with the
Government,nonlendingservices,and intensiveconsultationswith all developmentpartners during
the preparationof the PRSPand the CAS (see Attachment5).
32. LinkingGender and Poverty Reduction. In BurkinaFaso, as in most African economies,
womenplay substantialeconomicroles (seeAttachment6). Theimplicationsfor the CASare as follows:
Gmender
shouldbe consideredan issue of economicgrowth and efficiency,not just a problem
of equity, and not just limited to the social sectors. Gender-basedasset inequality directly
limits growth and poverty reduction.Men and women experience poverty differently,and
different aspects of poverty(inequality,vulnerability,isolation,powerlessness)have gender
dimensions.

* Investmentsin the householdeconomyhave substantialpay-offsin increased efficiencyand
growth in the market economy, and will also contribute to improving the health and
education status of the poor: (i) labor-saving technology relating especially to food
processing is likely to have a greater immediate impact in raising the productivity and
reducingthe time burdensof women;(ii) domesticenergy(fuelwood)is of great importance;
(iii) transportinterventionsneed to reflect the differentneeds of men and women, so as to
improve women's access to transport services(including intermediatemeans of transport)
commensuratewith their load-carryingresponsibilities.
* Comparedwith men,women operateunder severetime constraints,which limit their options
and flexibilityto respondto changingeconomicopportunities.
33.
Of particularconcernare the differentHlV prevalencerates for young men and women aged
15 to 24 in Burkina Faso, respectively,3.33 and 7.51 percent. In terms of access to productive
resources,there remain key differencesin earned income, in access to fmancialservices,land, and
agricultural services. Despite women's important role in agriculture,only around 15 percent of
extensionagents are female.Availabledata also indicatethat the participationof men and women in
publiclife and institutions,and in decision-makingprocesses,are highlyuneven.

9

34. EnsuringEnvironmentalProtection.The PRSP has identified sustainable managementof
natural resources as a major principle for combatingpoverty. This is based on the fact that
deforestation,land degradation,and to a lesser extenturban air pollution(mainlydue to emissionsby
motorized transportation)are currently having a high economic and social cost. In particular,
deforestationand land degradationnot only constituteseriousenvironmentalproblems,but are also a
major constraint to sustained agriculturalgrowth.The loss of biodiversityregarded valuable and
threatenedon a global basis is also a concern addressedby the Bank in BurkinaFaso as part of its
mandateas a GEF implementationagency.
35.
Since low agriculturalyields, food insecurity,and povertyboth ultimatelylead to and result
from environmentaldegradation,the PRSPemphasizesagriculturalintensificationand modernization
as an effective approach to protecting Burkina Faso's natural resource base, and expanding
employmentand income-generatingactivities for the majorityof the poor.A numberof appropriate
agricultural technologicalpackages have been identified to this end. Bank assistance will help
achieve a widespreadadoptionof these technologies,and strengthenthe capacity of the countryto
deal with any adverseimpactsthat couldresult fromintensifyingagriculturalproduction.
C.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCEPROGRAM

36.
The followingsection summarizesareas of emphasisfor theBank Group countryprogram
for FY01-03. The detailed presentationof lending and non-lendingprograms can be found in the
CAS matrix in AnnexB 1.
37. The programwas preparedin close collaborationwith the Burkinabeauthoritiesand takes into
account activities of other developmentpartners (see Attachment7). Many of the specific activities
build upon Bank's previous workin BurkinaFasoand representareas in which the Governmenthas
particularlysoughtBank expertise,and where the Bank can play a catalyticrole in bringingtechnical
know-how and mobilizing assistancefrom other donors. While the program represents proposed
commitmentsand assistance for the period FY01-03,its actions are designedto be supportiveof
long-term programs (e.g., ten-year programs in education, health and community based rural
development).
Focusand Compositionof BankAssistance
38. Supportingthe PRSP agenda will involveselectiveactions and programson each of the four
frontsdefinedby the Government(para 7).
SUPPORTING THE ACCELERATEDGROWTHSTRATEGYANDCLOSERINTEGRATIONINTO
THEREGIONALECONOMY

39.
Closer integration into the West African economy and the world economy can only be
attained through improving Burkina Faso's competitiveness.As a member of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU),Burkina Faso's recent macroeconomicstability is
attributable to the macroeconomicconvergence policy, which the Union and its Central Bank
3 Burkina Faso is also a member of the Economic
(BCEAO)have engineeredover the past decade.
Community of the West African States (ECOWAS), which has taken steps toward the
implementationof a free trade area (FTA)for sixteenWestAfricancountries.

1996, the Union has acceleratedthe pace of economicintegration,introducing a comwon external tariff (CET) in January
2000, and adopting a set of macroeconomicconvergencecriteria for member countries.
3Since

10

40.
These developmentsconstitutechallengesand opportunitiesfor Burkina Faso. As a small,
poor, and landlockedcountry with tiny and fragmentedmarkets, the country would improve its
competitivenessthroughdeeperinvolvementin the regionalintegrationprocess. Implementationof a
sound sub-regionalstrategy would help BurkinaFaso accelerateits reformprogram,providingfor
joint commitmentand consistency,scale and competition,and therefore,a higher policy multiplier
effect. On the other hand, there is a risk that protectionistcommon policies within WAEMU or
ECOWAScouldreduce the sub-region'scompetitivenessin the global economy.This would lead to
the concentrationof industrial activities in the coastal countries(Cote d'Ivoire, Senegal)and make
BurkinaFaso and othersmallerSahelian countriescaptivemarkets.
41.
As part of its ambitious plan to move BurkinaFaso toward a 21st century service-export
economy,the Governmentaims to decrease the mean tariff toward the lower end (Oto 10 percent)
range, and is consideringreducing taxes on corporateincome (from 35 percent to 20 percent), and
eliminatingimport taxes on selectedhigh-technologyitems-telecommunication and computers.The
reform program adopted by the Burkinabe authoritiescombinesnational market liberalizationand
sub-regionalmarket integration to develop a dynamic infrastructureservice and human resource
sectorwithinlimited public resourcesfor large investments.(i) In air transport,BurkinaFaso would
benefit from regional market liberalizationand unification,thanks to scale and competitioneffects.It
would also benefit from reduced access costs and from attracting ground services, especially for
freight,through market liberalizationand using tax policy to lower airport fees and ground service
costs. This would increase the country's chances of becoming a sub-regionalhub. (ii) In energy,
Burkina Faso has devoted considerableeffort to improving interconnectionswith its neighbors,
especiallyGhana and Cote d'Ivoire. Its participationin the West-AfricaPower-Poolwould ensure a
stable and cost-effectiveenergy supply for the country.Current disparitiesin energycosts-CFAF
102 per kwh in Burkina Faso versus CFA 40 in CMted'Ivoire-indicate that BurkinaFaso would
benefit from an integratedsub-regionalenergymarket. (iii) In telecoimnunications,nationalmarket
liberalization and sub-regional integration, including technical standardization, frequency
management,regulatorysystems,and establishmentrights wouldall benefit the sector. BurkinaFaso
is accelerating its privatization and liberalization programs and is working with WAEMIUand
ECOWAS toward telecom market integration. (iv) With regard to human and social capital
development,Burkina Faso will design and implementits educationand health policies (especially
the fight against AIDS and the provisionof specializedservices)at the regional level. Labor market
issues,includingcore laborstandardscall for continuedGovernment'sattention(see Attachment10).
42.
Regional integration will have transitional costs that will increase the Government's
financingrequirementsin the short run, especiallygiven the lower taxes on importsand the need to
increase spending in education,health, and basic infrastructures.As only a small portion of these
costs are likely to be met through intra-WAEMUfiscal transfers,greater assistancewill be needed
from the donor community.The Bank's support to BurkinaFaso to benefit from greater regional
integrationwould take two forms: (i) assistingthe Governmentto improvethe enablingmacro-policy
environmentwith more ambitious growth and poverty reduction targets; and (ii) supporting the
privatesectordevelopmentprogram.
43.
Improvementsto the enablingmacro-policyenvironmentwill be supportedthrough the
analyticalwork to update the PRSP, public expenditurereviews,various policy notes on key issues
(labor market dynamics,monetaryand fiscal policies in the WAEMUcontext), and the finalization
As an illustration, the CET irnplies a lower mean tariff level than what currently prevails in Burkina Faso which would suggest
some degree of net trade creation. Yet, in light of the type of bold move needed to improve visibility and to close the
comnpetitivenessgap, the CET appears still high by internationalstandards. Moreover,the introduction of the taxe degressivede
protection, means that tariff rates mnayrise to the upper end (15-30 percent) rather than the lower (0-10 percent) range, penalizing
landlocked,resource poor countries such as Burkina Faso with small industrial production.
4

11

of importantstrategypapers-private sectordevelopmentstrategy,financialsector review,long-term
plans for educationand health, energyand transportsector strategynotes. Through analyticalwork
on a regional assistancestrategy,the Bank will also providepolicy adviceto help BurkinaFasomeet
the challengesand opportunitiesof deeperregionalintegration.
44.
To support the private sector and financialdevelopmentstrategy, the Bank will emphasize
the need for BurkinaFaso to open up to new opportunities,domestically,regionallyand globally,and
to encourageprivate initiative to explore growth prospects in agriculture,mining and services,in
particular by improving the businessenvironment.The macroeconomicframeworkand objectives
will haveto reflectthe paradigmshift and take into considerationthe requirementsfor a bold private
sectordevelopmentstrategy.Bankassistancewill facilitate:
* liberalization in critical sectors-air transport/handling services, power and
telecommunications, introduction of competition in the cotton subsector, further
retrenchmentof public sector from agricultureand livestockproductiveactivities-to create
a unifiedsubregionalmarket and to securecost reductions,economiesof scale, and enhanced
competition,
* a divestitureprogramfor telecommunications,power and petroleumdistributioncompanies,
airport storage facilities, slaughterhouses,farm equipmentmanufacturingand distribution,
agriculturaland livestockinputsupplysystems;
* legal reform,tax reform,reductionof transactioncosts,harnonization to WAEMIUstandards
of import/exportdutieson agriculturaland livestockinputsand products;
* the developmentof alternativetransportcorridorsand improvementin financial services to
handle foreignexchangetransactions.
45. The Bank will also supportenterprisecapacitybuildingat the SMEandmicro-enterpriselevel,
with activities such as advisory services to agri-business,development of market information
systems, promotion of joint ventures for agro-processing,and improvement of quality control
systems.
SUPPORTING ACCESS OF THE POOR TO BASIC SOCIAL SER VICES.

46.
A crucial objective of the strategy is to support a more ambitious social sector reforrn to
prepare Burkina Faso's labor force for the challenge of regional integration and increased
competitivenessof its outward-orientedeconomy.To improvethe quality and equitable access of
social services,emphasismust be placed on improvingmanagerialand implementationcapacity,and
increasingexpenditureefficiency. The Bank plans to support primaryhealth care for the neediest,
basic education, and access to potable water. Support for access to primary health care will be
attainedthroughBank involvementin a ten-yearsectordevelopmentprogramthat will define actions
to addressexistingproblems.Specificstrategieswill includeactionsin three areas:
* public expenditure will be targeted to cost-effective interventions addressing the health

problemsof the poor and vulnerable.Rural areaswith the worst coverageand quality of basic
primaryhealth care serviceswill receivepriorityfor public investmentsand a larger share of
currentexpenditure,includingthe wage expenditure.
*

the Bank will help improve the efficiency of service delivery through the following: review of

the organizationalstructureof the Ministry of Health; review of its pricing policies in an
effort to reducethe cost or renderfree of chargeessentialand preventiveservicesto increase
access and utilizationof these services by the poor; availability of essential drugs will be
improved to 90 percent or more; and continued monitoring of the availability and
affordabilityof drugsto the poor and vulnerableis to be instituted.

12

* partnershipswill be built with local serviceproviders,and accountabilityto the poor will be
reinforced. The capacities of decentralized managers and service providers, and of
communitymanagementcommittees(COGES),will be strengthened,with a view to enable
them to establish effectivedialogue and partnerships,and provide ongoingmonitoringand
evaluationof performance.This is key to making publicserviceprovidersmore accountable
to the communitiesthey serve and to providingcommunitieswith the informationthey need
to participate effectively in planning and budgeting of local-level health activity. A
contractual approach to health service provision will also be developed, in an effort to
encouragelocal partnersin health care (NGOs,communities,private sector,and academia)to
target their activitiesto underservedareas.
47.
Bank supportfor educationis designedto help raise enrollmentand completionrates, as well
as learning outcomes and literacy rates, while maintaining a reasonable pace of expansion at
postprimarylevels where the emphasiswill be on improvingthe adequacyof learning outcomesfor
the labor market. For primary education, the Bank will help implement quality cost-effective
programsthat attain desiredlearningoutcomesat affordablepricesto the poor. Key leversto support
these objectivesinclude loweringthe cost of educationto the poor and girls, controllingexpenditure
at otherlevels of education,cuttingtheunit cost of education,and reducingrepetition.
48. With respectto other levelsof education,Bank assistancewill servethree goals simultaneously
within financial constraints:(a) to providea chance for qualifiedprimary school graduatesto move
on to higher levels of education;(b) to create a pool of candidatesfrom which selectionfor higher
educationand recruitment of primaryschool teacherscan be made; and (c) to supplyworkerswith
sufficienteducationto fill mid-leveljobs in the modemeconomy.
SUPPORTING OPPORTUNITIES
ACTIVITIES FOR THE POOR.

FOR

EMPLOYMENT

AND

INCOME-GENERATING

49.
Rural developmentof Burkina Faso is an important pillar to help expand economic
opportunitiesfor the poor. Recent evidence from many developing countries suggests that the
sectoral compositionof growth matters in terms of the impact on the incomes of the poor, given
estimates of elasticities of povertyreduction with respect to growth-a 1 percent increase in the
contributionof agricultureto GDP can yield a 1.6 percent increasein the incomesof the poor above
the GDPincreasein industryor services,whichincreasesincomesof the poor by 1.2percent and 0.8
percentrespectively.
50.
These differences are related to the linkages of agriculturalgrowth on small-scale nonagricultural sector of the rural economy5 Rural household incomes in Burkina Faso are highly
diversified-the averagerural householdderivesabout 39 percent of its income from cropping,13
percent from livestock production,and the remaining38 percent from non-agriculturalactivities.
Agriculturalgrowtharisingfrom reducedtransactioncosts (ruralinfrastructure)and increasedfactor
productivity(improvedtechnology,health, education)reducespoverty more through indirect than
direct processes. In additionto increasingemploymentand loweringfood prices6,-both of which
have an immediate poverty impact - increased farm incomes stimulate demand for goods and

5These linkages come from rural households spending their expanding income on locally produced non-tradable goods and

services. In Burkina Faso, household-leveldata indicate that 45 percent of any increase in rural household incomes is spent on
farm non-tradables (e.g. dairy products, millet) and 22 percent on non-farm non-tradables (e.g. locally processed foods, services,
locally manufactured items). Growth multipliers for Burkina Faso indicate that for each dollar of income generated in the
agriculturaltradable sector $1.88 of additionalincome will be generated in the local non-tradablesector due to linkages.
6 The average and marginalbudget shares for basic staples in rural Burkinabehouseholds are 60 percent and 53 percent,
respectively.
13

services in the large, employment intensive, rural and market-town based small-scale enterprise
sector.
51. Judiciously chosen public investment will be needed to overcome these constraints.
Specifically, public expenditure on rural infrastructure, technology generation, and institutional
development/reform will be necessary for rural and agricultural growth to accelerate. Decentralized
decision making and econornic empowerment of beneficiary communities is expected to improve the
choice, relevance, cost effectiveness, and maintenance of rural infrastructure. In addition, to meet the
demands of the local population, the deconcentration of sectoral ministries (and engaging in
public/private partnerships where appropriate) will improve the delivery mechanisms of public goods
and services and make them more demand-responsive.
52.
The CAS will support this vision of sustainable agricultural growth and rural development.
The main priorities are as follows: (i) support measures to open the economy and improve access to
markets (both domestic and export) for agricultural products, farmers, and agro-enterprises
(including investments in rural infrastructure); (ii) increase the productivity of rural assets (labor and
land) through health, education, water, and the conservation and renewal of natural resources; (iii)
support the rural decentralization process by transferring responsibilities and resources to those
directly concerned by the development process and pursue the institutional reform necessary to
refocus the role of the State; and (iv) initiate regional interventions centered on currently underexploited regions and aiming at removing constraints that are specific to the Central Plateau region.
SUPPORTING GOOD GOVERIVANCEAND INSTITUTIONAL REFORM
Box 4: Improvementsin Governanceand Fight against Corruption
Burkina Faso has made efforts over the past five years to improve governance and reduce corruption:
.
Burkina Faso has a unified budget system and a computerized expenditure management system (Circuit de la depense), which make
it possible to track the States accounting and financial transactions (some ministries are currently decentralizing this facility).
*
In 1998, the Government launched a systematic review of public expenditure by a national team of experts under the supervision of an
interministerial committee.
*
The 1999 and 2000 budget guidelines were significantly improved: in conformity with the HIPC social targets, the share of actual
public expenditure for health and education in the budget has increased; a shift to performance budgeting was made for six key
ministries (Health, Finance, Interior, Defense, Basic Education, and Secondary/Technical education), with outcome indicators to
monitor efficiency, and increased accountability for line managers.
*
A Medium-term Expenditure Framework for 2001-2003 was prepared and presented to Parliament in October 2000 with the 2001
budget bill. The introduction of a medium-term framework was discussed both at the local and central level. The discussion has
enhanced the capacity of the Government to formulate the annual budget within a dynamic perspective of medium-term objectives
and strategies.
•
Major improvements were observed in public procurement procedures, such as the periodic publication of bids received in public
tenders.
*
Trade liberalization and tariff reform have also reduced rents and increased revenues from customs administration.
*
The privatization program has removed a large source of rents and patronage from the public sector. The restructuring of the
financial sector and related reforms have greatly reduced the role of Government in credit allocation decisions (delinquent
borrowers are prohibited from obtaining new bank loans and from bidding on public procurement contracts and privatization. The
Government has also carried out a major overhaul of its business laws by adopting new business laws under the OHADA treaty.
.
In 1999 and for the first time in over a decade, budget execution reports laws (lois de reglements) for fiscal years 1993 and 1994 were
enacted by the National Assembly, the Governmentis committed to completing reports for the 1995-98 period by March 2001.
*
An independent Supreme Audit Court was created in 2000. It will be given a larger role in the preparation of audited budget laws.
*
An audit of military expenditures for fiscal year 1999 is currently being completed and will be transmitted to the Supreme Audit
Institution and to Parliament.

53. Results from surveys carried out by Transparency International also indicate that Burkina Faso
is considered one of the less corrupt countries in West Africa. The Government has made progress in
improving governance and reducing corruption (see Box 4 above). Nevertheless, corruption continues
to be perceived as a problem, undermining the effectiveness of public expenditure and the framework
for negotiations between private sector operators and the Government.

14

54. The PRSP presents four guiding principles to improve governance: (i) adopting a more
comprehensiveapproach to public finance managementto ensure that public funds from all sources
are managed according to a clear set of consistent and transparent rules, and in conformitywith
internationally accepted good practices; (ii) reducing Government intervention and discretion in
economic activity; (iii) making the Governmentmore accountable by increasing participation of
electoral bodies, civil society groupsand the private sector in policy design, policy implementation,
and monitoring;and (iv) ensuring a more efficientuse of public revenuesby focusingpublic policy
evaluation on results on the ground. Following these principles, the strategy developed by the
Burkinabeauthoritiesincludesactionsin the followingareas:
55. Increasing awarenessof the economic andpolitical costs of corruption.The nationalplan of
good governanceadopted in 1998 seeks to correct distortionsin public administrationby promoting
suchvaluesas meticulousness,probity,and transparencyin public affairsand amongbusinessmen,and
by intensifyingthe struggle againstpractices at odds with the general interest, especiallycorruption,
nepotism,and patronage.A national anti-corruptionnetworkis currentlybeing set up for comments
and proposalsregardingpossiblesolutions.
56. Strengthening the judicial system. The judicial system still faces a number of issues: (i)
insufficientnumber of judges and courts (most courts are concentratedin Ouagadougouand BoboDioulasso);(ii) the slowness of decisionmaking (long delays beforejudgements are rendered) and
publication of decisions; (iii) lack of accountability and impartiality of judges; (iv) lack of
equipment;and (v) lack of knowledgeof the generalpublic (includingbusinesspeople)of their rights
and obligations. In addition, administrativeproceduresare very cumbersomefor enterprisecreation
and contributeto high transactioncosts.
57. Based on the recommendationsof the National Forum on Justiceheld in October 1998, the
Ministry of Justicehas prepareda judicial reformstrategyand nationalactionplan coveringthe period
2000-04. The plan was approvedby the Councilof Ministerson April 12, 2000. Its objectivesare: (i)
to strengthenthe institutionalstatus of thejudiciaryby carryingout institutionalreforms and measures;
and (ii) to increaseand strengthenjudicial systeminfrastructureand the human,material,and financial
resources at its disposal. Gearedto these objectives,the plan proposes11 action programs with an
overall budget of CFAF 24 billion. The European Union has taken the lead in supporting these
reforms. The Bank, however, will continue to work with both the Governmentand other donorsto
help implementthe agenda.
58. Improvingpublic administrationandpublicfinance management.With respectto reform of
public administrationin Burkina Faso, a restructuringprocess has been going on since 1992. The
ministryresponsiblefor the civil servicehas initiatedsystematicand forward-lookingtalks with several
representativesof civil society and key players in the public administrationin order to lay the
foundationsfor a comprehensivereform.National conferenceson the comprehensivereform of the
civil serviceprovidedan opportunityto discussand enrich draft texts that were subsequentlyadopted
by the NationalAssembly.Essentially,they compriselaws establishingthe forms of interventionand a
distributionof spheres of competencebetween the State and other stakeholdersin Burkina Faso's
development;the legal frameworkgoverningemploymentin the civil serviceand governmentofficials;
and rules governingthe creation,organization,and managementof governmentbodies. To them should
be addedthe decree on rules for drawingup public sectorprogramand progressreports in the public
administrationand the decree orderinggeneralizeduse of manuals of proceduresand performance
chartsin all branchesof the civil service.
examnple,to create a company in Burkina Faso, a small entrepreneur would have to go through numerous steps and pay
duties of up to 20 percent of its capitalbefore he can even start activities.
7For

15

59. The authoritieshave greatly improvedtheir budgetingand expenditurepractices over the past
five years. But despite recent improvementsin revenue collection,Burkina Faso continues to be
faced with an inadequatetax structure.Fiscalrevenueis highlydependenton a relatively high level
of tariffs, which discriminatesagainst exports and underminesthe efficiency in the allocation of
publicresources.In the contextof the implementationof the WAEMU'scommonexternaltariff, the
Governmenthas designeda reform programwhich includes: adoptingmeasures aimed at shifting
fiscal resource away from trade taxes and strengtheningtax administrationby broadeningthe tax
base through curtailingtax and customsduty exemptions(in accordancewith evolving WAEMU
policy, in particular the envisaged regional harmonization of the investment code); reducing
excessiveregulationof private entities and adoptionof preferentialschemes; and strengtheningtax
administrationthroughthe computerizationof all customrevenuecollectionoffices.
60. Fosteringdecentralization.Convincedthat a well-thought-outdecentralizationprocess,carried
out in a pragmaticand discerningmanner,enhancesdemocracyinasmuchas it supportslocal initiatives
and grassrootscontrolby locallyelectedleaders,the Governmenthas set in motiona processthat began
with the adoptionin 1998of writtenguidelinesfor decentralization(textesdorientationen matierede
decentralisation),which are currentlybeing implementedAccelerationof the process requires: (i)
continuationof the decentralizationpolicy with the same pragmatism and graduality that have
characterizedit so far in orderto allowthe communitiesto organizethemselvesin a way thatwill allow
them to respond to local expectations;(ii) adequatefnancing provisionsdesigned to provide the
communitieswith the means they need to be able to fulfill, from now on, the tasks that have been
devolvedto them, so that the retrenchmentof the State does not bring with it a deteriorationin
indispensablebasic social services (above all in education and health); (iii) training of regional
representativesto prepare them for the managementand supervisionroles conferred on them by
decentralization;(iv) implementationof an efficientand impartiallocal administration,responsiveto
the needs of the population; (v) efforts to achieve citizen participationthrough civil society
organizationsin local development,not only in the formulationof objectivesand choice of meansbut
also in executionand supervisionof actions undertaken;(vi) the practice of decentralized,local
cooperation,while respectingnationaldevelopmentpriorities;(vii)adoptionof an officialtext to solve
any anomaliesresultingfrom the geographicalremappingof administrativeborders,while maintaining
a sufficient degree of decentralizationof services to make interventionsmore effective, improve
citizens'accessto publicservices,and installgenuinegrassrootsgovernment;and (viii) adoptionof an
officialtext allowingtrue decentralizationof managementof the State'shuman,material,and financial
resources,by grantingnew powersto officialsresponsiblefor operations.
D. VEHICLES FOR BANK ASSISTANCE, ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS AND
CONTINGENCIES
61.
To supportthe operationalobjectivesof the PRSP, theBank envisagesaprogram and related
country budget allocation which will: (i) give priority to supervision of ongoing projects; (ii)
acknowledgethe importantrole of donors;(iii) consolidatelendingoperationsinto fewer,but broader
resourcetransfermechanismsthat are more closelyintegratedwith the Government'sownbudgetary
allocationand executionprocesses;and (iv) includea share of nonlendingservicesto foster a robust
analyticalbase for consensusand partnershipbuilding.
62.
To refocus its assistanceprograrnwith a consistentemphasison rapid growthwith poverty
reduction, the Bank Group strategywill focus attention on: (i) key social sectors where there are
viable long-termnstrategies, or where they can be developed;(ii) longer-termeconomicreforms to
improvecompetitivenessand reduce businesscosts; (iii) improvingpublic resourcemanagementin
the country;and (iv) adaptingBank programsto the sub-regionalframeworkand potentials. In terms
of instruments,there will be a continuationof analyticaland advisoryactivities, as knowledgeis the
16

critical input for progressin the substantiveareaspresentedin the PRSP.The Bank will also support
public spendingincreasinglythroughconsolidatedlendingoperations-results-drivenprogrammatic
credits,with separateprojectsfor capacitybuildingand infrastructureinvestmentsdirectlytargetedto
poverty alleviation and private sector developmentand where active institutional strengtheningis
requiredfor improvedservicedelivery.
63. Threelendingscenariosare envisaged:base,high,and low cases.The base case
lending/nonlendingprogramis in the order of $400-420millionover FY01-03(see Table4). The
base case is consistentwith the presentIDA allocation.Underthe high casescenario,the Bank could
increaselending to around $450-500millionover the threeyears, about50 percent of which couldbe
in the form of fast-disbursingcreditsin key sectors(see para 80). Underthe low casescenario,
lendingwouldbe limitedto socialsectorsand rural development.
CAS Base case Assistance Program FY01-03
64. The base casescenariowould be contingenton: (i) continuedmaintenanceof good
macroeconomicperformance;(ii) satisfactoryimplementationof the reformprogramin the key
povertyreducingsectorspresentedin the PRSP;(iii) enhancedexternaland internalcompetitiveness
throughconcreteactions to liberalizeutilities and reduceinput and factorcosts, as outlinedin the
PRSP;(iv) improvedtransparencyand accountabilityin public financemanagement,as outlinedin
the PRSP; and (v) continuedsatisfactoryportfolioperformance.
SUPPORTING THE ACCELERATED GROWTH STRATEGY AND
INTEGRATIONINTO THEREGIONALECONOMY

CLOSER

65.
The Bank will help BurkinaFaso consolidaterecent gains in macroeconomicmanagement
and move beyond stabilization to deeper structural reforms and sustained economic growth. A
poverty reduction support credit (PRSC) will be prepared in FY01, focusing on reforms to
improve public finance managementand the competitivenessof the economy,and to facilitate the
country's integration into the regional and world economy.Should there be a continuedneed for
fiscaladjustmentand balanceof paymentsupport,the Bank couldprepareanotherPRSCin FY03 to
furthersupportprogramsin key sectorswhere sectoralstrategies and action plans are being defined
as part of the implementationof the Government'spovertyreductionstrategy.
66.
A technical assistance credit for Private Sector Development(Competitivenessand
Enterprise Development project) will be prepared in FY02 to provide support in the
implementationof the residual privatization program; improve the quality, access, and cost of
telecommunications;promotethe developmentof a strongindigenousprivatesectorin BurkinaFaso
througha streamlinedbusinessenvironmentand well-targetedfinancialand non-financialservicesto
small and medium-sizeenterprises.
67.
The Bank will supportthe Governmenteffortsto improvequality and costs of infrastructure,
notably in water, urban, energyand transportsectors.In thewater sector,the Bank will supportthe
preparation of the OuagadougouWater Supplyproject (FY01) aimed at improving the living
conditionsof the populationin the capital city by increasing,in the long run, the quantityand quality
of potable water available and strengtheningthe managementof the utility company (ONEA) by
increasingautonomyand improvingaccounting,long-termplanning and efficiencyof operationand
maintenance.
68.
The Bank has been very successfulin urban development,and the CAE suggestedthat the
future program take into account the lessons learned.Under the ongoing Urban Environment
operationthe Bank will continueto supportimprovementof urban livingconditionsthroughpriority
urban works, participationof the urban populationin urban services developmentand support to
17

Government'sdecentralizationprogram.Supplementalfinancing for this project could be proposed
in FY02.
69.
In the energy sector, the Bank will assist the Government,through the preparationof a
sector reform operation (FY02),aimed at introducingprivate sector participationto improvethe
efficiency of the provision of electricity services and the supply of hydrocarbonproducts to the
economy, and increasing access to infrastructureservices, especiallyto rural communities. This
operation will include a capacity development component to strengthen management of the
traditional energy sub-sector,capitalizing on ongoing work of the RPTES Program funded by
Dutch,Danish,and Norwegiangrants.
70.
For a landlocked country like Burkina Faso, the efficiency of the transport system is
critical to economic development and growth. Under the PASECT (closed in FY00) the Bank
provided assistancefor a large reformprogram,which included restructuringof national shippers
council, public sector disengagementfrom road maintenanceexecutionactivities, liberalizationof
urban transport services, privatization of the national air transport company (ongoing) and
concessioningof railway operations.The Government'sstrategy in the transport sector is to (i)
increase public investmentefficiency,(ii) improveroad transportproductivity,and (iii) strengthen
managementand policy implementationcapacityof the public sector to ensure adequateknowledge
and monitoring of sector performance.Given alternativesources of financing for this sector, the
Bank is currentlynot consideringadditionallendingfor transportprojectsexceptfor rural roads.
71.
With Bank support,the Governmenthas developeda programto build capacityand provide
an attractive climate for investmentin themining sector. The ongoingMining Sector Capacity
Buildingand EnvironmentalProjectprovidesassistanceto strengthenand deepen the regulatory
and fiscal reforms, build capacity in public and private sector agencies, complete geological and
environmentaldatabasesand assistin the artisanaland small scale miningsector.
SUPPORTINGACCESSOF THEPOOR TOBASICSOCIALSERVICES.
72.
In education,the new proposedBasic EducationAPL (FY02)will address issues such as
the slow increase in primary enrollment and the unsatisfactoryimprovementsin the quality of
education,as well as inequalitybetweenboys' and girls' enrollments,and rural and urban areas, and
teacherrecruitmentin local communities.Underthe ongoingPost-PrimaryEducationproject,the
Bank is supporting increased access to secondaryeducation, increased enrollment of girls, and
improvedqualityof post primaryeducation.
73.
In health, our analysis of the allocation and utilization of HIPC funds will provide an
assessmenton the need for increased IDA fundingin the sector and a new Health SIP may be
needed(FY03).The Bank would supportthe Govermment'sten-yearhealth strategy(currentlyunder
preparation)to address issues of poor health and nutrition status, of rapid population growth and
AIDS in BurkinaFaso. An HIV/AIDSDisasterResponseoperationis being preparedin FY01 in
supportof the Governmentmulti-sectoral2001-05HFV/AIDSmedium-termstrategicplan. The two
ongoing projects, the Health and Nutrition operation and the Populationand AIDS Control
operation,are currentlyscheduledto close in FY01.
SUPPORTING OPPORTUNITIESFOR EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME-GENERATING
ACTIVITIES FOR THEPOOR.
74.
In the rural sector, the Government's long-term vision is one of participatory and
representativelocal governmentsand institutionsplanning and managing their own development
programs and mobilizingthe necessaryresourcesthroughincreasedlocal revenuesand Government
fiscal transfers. The Bank's main instrumentis a Community-BasedRural DevelopmentAPL
which is being presented to the Board with this CAS and which would support Burkina Faso's
18

NationalProgram for DecentralizedRural Development(PNDRD)to: (i) strengthenthe capacity of
villages and local governmentsto prioritize, plan, implement, and maintain community-based
investments;(ii) provide decentralizedfunding for demand-drivenand community-managedrural
infrastructureand services; and (iii) support the ongoing decentralizationprocess. The PNDRD
intends to reach all rural communities and implement a harmonized, multi-donor funded,
decentralizedrural developmentframework.It will be implementedover a 15-yearperiod,consisting
of three 5-yearphases. Eachphase will be designedflexiblyto adapt to the country'sdecentralization
choices,the pace of institutionalreforms, and the need to harmonizeapproachesof various donors.
To enhancethe impactof the Community-BasedRuralDevelopmentAPL on the nationaland global
environment,two GEF 15-yearoperationswill also be prepared:PRONAGENAPL (FY01 Natural
EcosystemManagementProgram;a follow up to the pilot GEPRENAF)and SILEMAPL (FY02
Integrated Ecosystem ManagementProgram). The Bank will also support strengtheningof rural
infrastructurethrougha proposedRuralRoadsProjectin FY03.
75.
The portfolio of ongoing operations includes the AgriculturalServices II operation in
supportof producers' organizationsand the nationalprogramfor agriculturalresearchand extension.
During the upcoming mid-term review (November2000), the project will be restructured to: (i)
improvethe efficiency of services,by implementingprogressivelydemand-drivenmechanisms,and
(ii) providethe frameworkfor morerapid, sustainable,broad-basedand export-orientedgrowthin the
agriculture and livestock sectors. Under the ongoing Private Irrigation operation, the Bank
supports strengthening of cost-effectivesystems to deliver demand-drivenservices for private
irrigation.The ongoing GEPRENAFoperation(Pilot Community-BasedNatural Resources and
Wildlife Management)introducesa new approachto biodiversityconservationthat aims to find a
commonsolutionto both developmentand conservationconcerns,by involvinglocal communitiesin
the sustainablemanagementand profitableexploitationof natural resources.
76.
Nonlending activities in the rural sector will focus on three priorities: (i) support
implementationof the rural developmentstrategycurrentlybeing adoptedby the Government,and
improvethe sector knowledgebase, as recommendedby OED;(ii) improvethe efficiencyof public
spending in the sector, through a full PER; and (iii) improve the quality of statistical data,
particularlythroughsupport(in the form of advice and capacitybuilding)for povertymonitoringand
follow-upof PRSPimplementation.

19

Box 5: Rationalefor PRSCs in Burkina Faso
Recent PER studies and other analytical work carried out in the framework of the 2001-2003 MTEF indicate that full
imnplementationof sectoral strategies already adopted or currently being finalized in priority sectors (education, health, rural
development) will require major improvements in public sector management. The CAE noted that Bank projects in Burkina
Faso, while quite comprehensive in coverage and broadly consistent with one another, have too often been conceived
independently, with little explicit analysis of potential trade-offs among themr In order to address the country's weak
institutional capacity and to ensure sustainability of the reform program, "DA should focus chiefly on reforming
govemance, particularly as it affects the environment for private sector development and the allocation of public resources."
In the context of the four PRSP pillars-accelerating broad-based growth; ensuring that the poor have access to basic social
services; expanding opportunities for employment and income-generating activities for the poor; and promoting good
governance-, Bank Group's assistance will address cross-sectoral and public management issues. To be effective and to
ensure better involvement of sectoral ministries and all key stakeholders in the dialogue, the shift from project lending
towards program lending presented in paras. 77-79 will imply a gradual change in lending instruments. We envisage two
Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) over the period FY 2001-2003.
The PRSC instrument would be consistent with the PSAC framework for progranmmaticadjustment lending*. It would
provide an adequate framework for comprehensive public finance reforms that require simultaneous actions at the level of
the Ministry of Economy and Finance, and at the level of line ministries. Its flexibility would also provide a more effective
mechanism to address sector-wide issues that cannot be dealt with traditional, stand alone investment projects. The PRSC
would also facilitate the dialogue on the Government's overall use of public resources,regardless of their sources. Finally, by
focusing directly on the four main pillars of the PRSP, the PRSC would help strengthen donor coordination and Government
ownership of the reform progratn
While improvements are necessary to strengthen capacity in public fnancial management, public procurement, budget
reporting, public disclosure, auditing, and accountability, the Government has made substantial progress in budget
management over the past years (see Box 4). One lesson from the recent ICR for the Economic Management Reform Support
Operation is that a broader instrument like the PRSC can itself be particularly effective in supporting the policy reforms and
institutional changes needed to improve fiduciary management.
* PRSC will be prepared within the PSAC framework as discussed in the Programmnaticand Emergency Adjustment
Lending: World Bank Guidelines (R98-249), October 2, 1998 and Operational Memorandum Guidelines for Programmatic
Adjustment Loans/Credits,February 11, 2000. See also SupportingCountry Development: World Bank Role and Instruments
in Low-and Middle Income Countries (DC/2000-19), September 8, 2000.

SUPPORTING GOOD GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONALREFORM.

77. The Bank has supported efforts to improve governance in Burkina Faso through several
operations(PID, SAC I, EMRSO,SAC III). Nevertheless,further reflectionand additionalsteps are
needed to ensuregreater effectivenessand transparencyin the managementof public affairs.This was
confirmed by studies recently conductedin connectionwith the public expenditurereview, which
underscoredthe importance of continuingwork on problemsrelated to budget execution capacity,
above all in the social sectors. Moreover,given the intention to move toward a program support
system,both a priori and a posterioricontrolmechanismsneedto be strengthened.A countryfinancial
accountabilityassessment(CFAA)will be started in FYO1and supportfor these activities could be
providedunder a PublicSectorManagementoperationin FY03.
78.
The dialoguethat wouldunderpinthe shift from project lendingto programsupportwouldbe
essential to increase the country's absorptivecapacity and would provide a more effective way to
build management capacity in the public service. By relying on Governmentsystems, the Bank
would necessarily focus attention on strengtheningthese, rather than setting up parallel structures
that bypass national systems that divert scarce talent to handle donor procedures and reporting.
Finally, it would help improvedonor coordinationas otherdonorsare preparedto join this approach,
such as the EU, theAfDB, and severalothers.
79. The Bank would be assessingand supportingstrengtheningGovernment's capability in three
areas: (i) budget formulationto help assure that the process of formulatingand arbitratingbudgets is
20

as transparentand open as possible,with the expectationthat this will lead to budgets that are more
focused on poverty and development;(ii) budget implementation,including the capacity to track
expendituresand to producethe financial informationneeded for internal audits and the monitoring
and evaluation information needed to assess budgetary outcomes and impact; and (iii) external
auditing, especially the capability and independenceof the supreme audit authority to enhance its
ability to carry out both fiancial and performance audits. The Bank intends to devote substantial
resources to help strengthen Governmentperformancein these areas and to monitor improvement.
Beyond conditions dealing with managing public resources, others would include a sound macrofiscal framework(no accumulationof arrears) and sectoral policies that are favorable to private
investment.
FY2001-2003
Program,
Table4: BaseCaseAssistance
--An:Alytical Work

*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*

CAS
Support for PRSP Monitor. (*)
HIPC Follow up
TA for PER (*)
Public Service Quality
Assessment
Economic monitoring
Technical assistance to the
National Statistics Institute
(INSD)
Poverty Database
IDF Gender/Legal Reform
Support to EU Initiative
Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (*)

FY 2003

2002

FY 2001-F.

*

*
*
*

*

*

--

Support for PRSP Monitor (*)
TA for PER (*)
Economic Monitoring
Technical assistanceto the
National Statistics Institute
(INSD)
CPPR
Client Feedback Survey

_-_-_-_--_--_-_-

*
*

*

*
*

_--

TA for PER (*)
Vocational training strategy
Technical assistanceto the
National Statistics Institute
(INSD)
CAS Progress Report
Economic Monitoring

Lending (in millions of US$)
*
*
*
*

* Public Sector Mgt $10
Basic Education $30 (*)
Rural roads $40 (*)
*
Energy $20
Competitivenessand Enterprise * PRSC (2) $60
*
Development $25
*__ Urban environment suppl. $20
(*) Indicates Bank operations/non-lendingthat would be maintained in the low case scenario

Community-based RD $67 (*)
OuagadougouWater Supply $70
PRSC (1) $60
AIDS Disaster Response (*) $20

*
*

High CaseLending Scenario
80. A high case lending scenario could be envisaged if Burkina Faso accelerates and deepens
reforms relative to targets set in the PRSP, with a focus on increasing transparency and
accountabilityin policy implementation,and on managingexternal risks more effectively.The high
case scenario assumes that the Burkinabe authorities are able to implement the new economic
paradigm described in para. 21 swiftly and to a significantextent. This would provide the basis for
increasedprivate investment,and put BurkinaFaso on a higher export-ledpath. It also assumes that
the authoritieshave demonstratedthrough more efficient and effective use of public funds that
domestic absorptivecapacity for higher lending is in place. This would set the frameworkfor faster
povertyreductionand improvementsin social indicators.Triggersfor high case lendingwould be (in
addition to the base case assumptions):(i) major improvementsin public finance management,
includingthe implementationof institutionalreforms and budgetaryproceduresthat make the system
more efficient and budget management more expeditious, reliable, transparent, consistent, and
21

accountable; (ii) swift implementation of the private sector development strategy, including
completionof the utilities reform program; and (iii) increase in the absorptivecapacity for public
funds, as demonstratedby the speed and level of implementation of priority public expenditure
programs. Under this scenario, the Bank could increase lending to around $450-500 million over
FY01-03, about 50 percent of which could be in the form of fast-disbursingloans to support the
Government reform program in key sectors (human development, private sector and finance,
transport,energy).
Low Case Scenario
81. Failure to implement the reform program outlined in the PRSP, to maintain macroeconomic
stability,and sustained declinein portfolio performance,would trigger a low case lending scenario.
In this case, lending would be limited to support health, the fight against HITV/AIDS,education
programs, the community-based development program and rural roads. There would be no
adjustmentlending.Policy dialogueand a limitednonlendingprogramwould continue(see Table 4).
Table 5: Triggers and Main Assumptionsfor Lending Program Composition
Low Case Triggers
- Failure to implement effectively
the reform agenda outlined in the
PRSP and maintain
macroeconomic stability;

Base Case Assumptions
Continued maintenanceof good
macroeconomicenvironment
satisfactory to the Bank;
-

High Case Triggers
- All Base case assumptions,plus:

Satisfactory implementahonof the
reform program in the key poverty
reducing sectorspresented In the
PRSP;
- Enhanced extemal and intemal
competitivenessthrough actions to
liberalize utilities and reduce input
and factor costs as outlined in the
PRSP;

- Major improvements in public finance
m
nanagement, including implementation
of institutional reforns and budgetary
procedures that will make budget
managementmore efficient, expeditious,
reliable, transparent, consistent, and
accountable;
- Swift implementation of the private
sector development strategy, including
completion of the utilities reform
program;

- Improved transparencyand
accountabilityin public finance
managementas outlined in the
PRSP;

- Increasein the absorptive capacity for
public funds as demonstrated by the
speed and level of implementation of
priority public expenditure programs.

-

- Sustaineddecline in portfolio
performance

-Continued satisfactory portfolio
performance.

Lending would be liniited to social
sectors and rural development.No
adjustment lending. Continued
policy dialogue and limited

Lending: $400-420 million
Focus on the educationand health
sectors, and actions to stimulate
equity-basedgrowth.

Lending: $450-500 rmillion,about 50
percent fast-disbursing.

nonlending.

Due Diligence Nonlending Services
82. In close collaborationwith the Burkinabe authorities,IDA has gathered over the past three
years enough due diligence information and knowledgeto improve the dialogue on the reform
program. IDA has relied on a combinationof annual Policy Framneworkpapers (PFP), a second
priority survey and two poverty profiles, public expenditurereviews, sectoral policy notes, and
infornal papers on specific issues. IDA has also helped the Burkinabe authorities carry out a
substantialamount of analyticalwork in key sectors (education,health, rural development,energy,
transport,and private sector development).With IDA support,the Governmenthas also carried out a
comprehensiveeconomic study on long-term sources of growth and competitivenessin Burkina
Faso. The study has served as the basis for the preparationof the Poverty Reduction StrategyPaper

22

and has helpedmove forwardthe policy dialogueon the competitivenessof the economyand private
sectordevelopment.A CountryProcurementAssessmentwas completedin 2000.
83. Due diligence AAA will provide a thorough understandingof the country's development
problems,of the analytical frameworkfor designingand evaluatingmacroeconomicand sectoral
strategies,and of the need for and availabilityof extemalfinancing.It will alsohelp coordinatedonor
projects and harmonizeIDA, Governmentand IMF perspectives,and generatepublic discussionof
Burkina Faso's developmentoptions, with the aim of creating public support for the ambitious
reform agendaahead. It is expectedthat authoritieswill take the lead in carryingout these activities.
The agenda includes a participatory poverty assessment (PPA), public expenditure reviews,
fiduciary/institutionalassessmentsfor public finance accountability,and economicpolicy notes to
provide an economy-wideview of the main challengesfacing the country.The AAA programalso
includes studies on public finance management,includingtaxation; on macroeconomicperformance
and povertyalleviation;and on private sectorparticipationin infrastructure.The Bank is proposing
to use due diligence analyticaland advisory activities(AAA)more intensivelythan in the past few
years to provide a solid basis for policy dialogue and enhance the design of operations. The Bank
program will include such activities as supportto PRSP monitoring;technical assistanceto PER
processes,assistanceto INSD; capacitybuilding for economicmonitoring. Other activities to be
financed include a country financial accountabilityassessment (FY01), a public service quality
assessment(FY01),and a vocationaltraining strategy(FY03).
Role of MIGA and IFC
84. Due to the limited size of the formal sector(only 80 enterprisesemployingmore than 50 staff,
includingstate enterprises),there has been relativelylittle private investmentand consequentlylittle
activityby IFC (one small scale miningproject and two financialsectorinvestmentprojects totaling
$2 million) and MIGA in the past. FIAS is currently assisting the Government in streamlining
registrationprocedures to improve the business climate and make the country more competitive.
lFC's role is expected to be limited in the near term, due to low demand, but could expand
substantiallyin the context of the implementationof the new developmentagenda,especiallyin the
infrastructureprivatizationarea.
III.

KEY ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING THE CAS

MONITORINGOF OUTCOMES

85.
One of the key featuresin the CAS is the frameworkfor monitoring:(i) countryperformance,
to determinewhetherthe conditionsfor the base casestill exist,or whetherthere is justification for a
change in the size or compositionof the proposedassistanceprogram(see Table 6, below); and (ii)
Bank performancein deliveringon the CASobjectives.
86.

Country performance. Since 1997, Burkina Faso has been testing a new approach to

developmentaid conditionality.This approach,known as the reformulatedconditionalitytest and
designedin the frameworkof the SPA,is gearedmainly towardenhancingGovernmentownershipof
the policy identification,monitoring,and evaluationprocess;and towardenhancingthe effectiveness
of aid by monitoringprograms on the basis of measurableand previouslyestablishedperformance
indicators. The idea is for all donors and lenders to reach consensuson a series of performance
indicators for Governmentactivities in key sectors. Those indicators are then used as the basis for
decisionsregardingdisbursementof financialassistance-preferablyin the form of programsupport.
Table 4 and Annex B4 list AAA activities funded under BB administrativeresources, whereas Annex B 1 also includesAAA
activities funded under Bank projects, and/or Trust Funds.

23

87. For each major policy domain and in addition to monitoringindicatorsfrom the SPA test, the
Bank has, with the authorities, key stakeholders and donors, elaborated a detailed monitoring
framework,based on agreed-uponindicators(see Attachment8). Theseindicatorsare drawn from the
PRSP. The main monitoring instrumentswould be the reviews of the structural reform program,
carriedout every six monthswith the IMF, and the publicexpenditurereviews,togetherwith selected
economicand sector work, and householdsurveys.Countryportfolioperformancereviews (CPPRs)
will continue to be carried out every two years, and will be led by the Resident Mission.A CAS
progressreportwill be preparedand discussedwith the authoritiesin FY03.
Table6: ProposedCoreBenchmarks9
duringCASPeriod
1. Poverty headcount ratio (*)
2. Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

1999
45-3
105

2003
40
85-80

1 13

100-95

- Rural
- Urban
4. Primary enrollrnent rate (percent)
5. Gross primary enrollment rate for girls/total enrollment
(percent)

(S)Number of

67
41
:336
:

55-50
53
50
_____

persons below the poverty line as a percent of total population.

COLLABORATIONWITH OTHERDEVELOPMENTPARTNERS

88.
BurkinaFaso enjoys broad donor support. A large numberof bilateral and multilateral aid
agencies and a significant number of local and international NGOs are active in the country.
External aid flows are estimatedto represent 13 percent of GDP (about the same as Government
revenue),and some 90 percent of thepublic investmentprogramis externallyfinanced.
89.
IDA partnershipwith the IMF has deepenedover the last fouryears withjoint work on HIPC,
PERs, and the PRSP. The effectivenessof the Bank/Fundrelationshiphas been critical, because in
the absence of clearly defined strategies in some sectors and with the limited capacity of the
0 overall aid coordination has been very uneven in recent years.
Cooperation Directorate,1
Inconsistenciesamong donorshave oftenled to intensivediscussionsand inefficiencies.Since 1999,
the Governmenthas shown an increasedinterestin fosteringsynergiesamongdonor activities. It is
now more determined to strengthen its aid management capacity and has started to adjust aid
coordinationmechanismsand practices,beginningwith the formulationof an operationalframework
(sector strategies, public expenditureprograms, harmonizedproject implementationarrangements)
for activities supportedby different donorsin several sectors (education,health, community-based
rural development).
90. The ambitiousnature of BurkinaFaso's developmentand povertyreduction strategyhighlights
the need for selectivity and greater use of complementaritiesamong donors.The Bank will work
closelywith the Governmentand otherdonorsto avoid duplicationwhilehelping build the country's
limited institutionalcapacity. The challengefor the Bank will be to build on existing cooperative
relationships and to focus on areas of its comparative advantage. During CAS preparation
information was collected by donor and sector on donors' assistance, as well as projected
9 In setting benchmarks during CAS Period and monitoring indicators (see Attachment 8), we draw on the experience of Burkina
Faso's pilot initiative on Reformulated Conditionality, under which the authorities and donors have agreed on specified outcomes
as the measure of progress under adjustment operations. The targets set by the authorities reflect the OECD/DAC International
Development Goals, although the target dates for universal enrollment in primary education and for eliminating gender disparity
in education have been adapted in line with the low base from which Burkina starts and its limnited implementation capacity.
to During FY00 CAS preparation, difficulties in gathering basic data and producing a summnarymatrix of the nature and volume
of aid from the various donors highlighted the administration's limited institutional capacity to manage foreign assistance on the
basis of a properly informed decision-rnaking process.

24

commitments.Attachment 7 provides overall amounts&. The difficultyin carrying out this task
suggests that both coordinationand tracking of aid will require capacity building on the part of
Governmentand simplificationof procedureson the part of donors.
91. Consultationwith the 1MFhas been excellentand should continueto be so, with joint-missions
twice a year as the main vehicle for macroeconomicpolicy dialoguewith the Government.Greater
effortswill be made to assure closecoordinationwith the EU. In the comingyears, consultationwill
be intensifiedand efforts will be made to harmonizepolicy advice, project design, and procedures
among developmentpartners(e.g., for the BasicEducationProject nowunder preparation).A closer
workingrelationshipwill also be soughtwith bilateral assistanceagencies,given their increasingly
heavy involvement in Burkina Faso. The Bank will strengthen the dialogue with all other
developmentpartners, including the UN agencies, the private sector, and representativesof civil
society.Residentmissionstaffingpolicywill aim at havingBank expertsmore involvedin sectorand
issues-orientedworkinggroupsin the field.
92. Another critical elementin this effortwill be to develop adequatemechanismsto monitorand
evaluatethe impact of externalassistance.In this context,the Bank will have to take the appropriate
steps to provide even greater support to the Governmentin the area of donor coordination.But
ultimately, the key to success will be the Government'sown coordinationand rationalization of
foreignaid.
IV. RISKS
93.
Implementationof the Bank's proposed assistance strategy faces three types of risks: (i)
deteriorationof the externalenvironment;(ii) weak institutionalcapacity;and (iii) political risks and
diplomatictensions.
94.
External Environment. Given the heavy reliance of Burkina Faso's economy on cotton,
gold, and livestock exports, the greatest concern of Burkinabe policymakersis the depression of
regionalas well as global demand,which would slowexportgrowthand delay implementationof the
povertyreduction strategy. The PRSP sets a target of 7 percent real GDP growth, on average, for
2001-2003.The PRSP acknowledgesthat BurkinaFaso's poverty reduction strategy is ambitious,
and that successwill substantiallydepend on externalfactors (demandfor cotton, world prices, the
dollar/CFAFexchange rate). The medium-termbalance of payment projections for Burkina Faso,
which will strongly influence the country's rate of economic growth, are subject to substantial
uncertaintiesregardingexportvolumesand pricesfor cottonand gold.
95.
Weak Institutional Capacity.The medium-termreforrn agenda presented in the PRSP,
especially in the social sectors, constitutes a weighty program for the next three years. Its
implementationwill require full commitmentfrom the authoritiesand significantmobilization of
civil society groups. Given the scope of the action plan to be undertaken-and in light of past
difficultiesin reaching some targetsin the educationand health sectors--thereis a risk that the reform
program could falter because of pressures from vested interests and persistent institutional
weaknesses.Moreover,thereis a risk that evenif reformsare fully implemented,therewill be a long
delayin supplyresponseand direct investments.
96.
Political Risks. BurkinaFaso has enjoyedpolitical stabilityunderthe leadershipof President
Blaise Compaore. The countryhas moved steadilytowardpoliticalpluralismand has now organized
several multiparty elections: presidential (1991 and 1998), parliamentary (1992 and 1997), and
municipal (1995 and 2000). However, there have been signs of social instability and opposition
since the assassinationof a popularjournalist in December 1998. To address the crisis, President
Detailed informnationby donor and sector is available at Direction Generalede la Coop&ation.

25

Compaore has promised some major political changes over the coming months. So far, the
Government has continued efforts to deepen economic and social reforms. Should a coalition
Governmentbe instituted in early 2001, there is a risk that the reform momentum could slow and
that, in a worst case scenario, some reforms couldbe halted. Another risk would be a fall in external
aid flowsresulting from the perceptionon the part of some donorsthat Burkina Fasohas governance
and humanrights problemsand that it plays a role in regional conflicts. It should also be noted that
political tensions in neighboringcountries,and in particular C6te d'Ivoire, could have implications
for the cross-bordermovementof migrant labor and the associated transfer of private international
remittances,which up to now have addedsignificantlyto BurkinaFaso's nationaldisposableincome.
97.
In our assessment,theserisks are significantbut manageable.The Bank will take a number
of steps to mitigate them. On the economicfront, the Bank, together with other donors, is closely
monitoring economic developments in Burkina Faso. Management of downside risks in the
macroeconomicframeworkis a central elementin the Bank's policy dialogue.The above-mentioned
monitoringframeworkhas been developedfor that purpose.The Bank's exposureis low and Burkina
Faso has consistently serviced its debt. On the institutionalfront, the risks are mitigated by the
Government'scommitmentto decentralizationand to ensuring full participationof all key segments
of Burkinabe society in the implementationand monitoringprocess. Bank Group programs under
considerationfor the medium term will mainstreamgrassrootsand women's participationin policy
design and evaluation. On the political front, even if there is a change in Government, the
probabilityof the worse case scenario-overall backtrackingof the reform program-is considered
moderatebecause there is growing awarenessacross BurkinaFaso's political spectrum that without
considerableforeign investment,the country will be unable to resist the challenges and grasp the
benefits of deeper regional integrationand achievesustainablegrowth.Diplomatictensions between
Burkina and neighboringcountries are mitigated by the Government's commitmentto comply with
UN resolutionsaboutconflictsin the region.
98.
On balance, therefore,there is a strongjustificationto assist BurkinaFaso in the challenging
times ahead. The base case programpresentedin the CAS, focusing on lending in priority sectors,
has been designedto meet the client's needswhile minimizingpotentialrisks.

JamesD. Wolfensohn
President
By ShengmanZhang
Attachments
Washington,D.C.
November3, 2000

26

Attachment 1
Constraintsto Growth and Poverty Reduction
In order to meet the challenging objectives of reducing poverty and increasing per capita income
in rural areas where most of the population live, the Burkinabe authorities have identified four
major constraints on the economy which they intend to tackle:
(i) Large social deficit, low labor productivity, and high unemployment. Burkina Faso's
population density is already the highest in the Sahel (40 inhabitants per km) and contributes to
the high incidence of poverty. At the same time, dependency ratios are high. With close to half
the population being under the age of 15, rapid population growth (2.8 percent) is not likely to
diminish over the near term. Such high population growth rates will put a strain on extremely
limited water resources. Water management is also a critical health issue as much of the
population has no access to clean drinking water. Moreover, Burkina Faso also continues to have
among the lowest gross primary school enrollment rates in sub-Saharan Africa: 44 percent for
boys and 34 percent for girls. Similarly, the health status of the population is poor with life
expectancy at birth reaching only 54 years, and AIDS prevalence is estimated to be about 6
percent. According to various growth accountingstudies, Burkina Faso's labor productivity is one
of the lowest in West Africa. And estimates of the unemploymentrates across the 45 provinces of
the country are high-about 20 percent in Ouagadougou,the capital city.
(ii) Poor economic infrastructure, high input costs, and limited size of the modem private sector.
Competition for new export markets is especially dependent on access to and adequate supply of
reliable and competitivelypriced infrastructure services. Yet, the relatively poor quality and high
costs of infrastructure in Burkina-including power, transport, telecommunication,and waterreduces the likelihood that private entrepreneurs, domestic and foreign, will increase their
investment in response to policy reforms. Furthermore, the size of the modem private sector is
limited. Burkina has a large informal sector of some 90,000 micro-enterprisesthat contributes 32
percent of GDP and accounts for 70 percent of non-agricultural employment.The informal sector
contributes more than 50 percent of value added in certain industries. The formal sector that
contributes 40 percent of GDP only employs 2 percent of the workforce. It comprises a rather
large number of very small enterprises (about 6,300 enterprises accounting for 25 percent of
GDP) and only 80 enterprises-including the 37 public enterprises-with more than 50
employees. More disturbing is the low public confidence in the equity and efficiency of the tax
system: tax rates are high on the small modem sector, as illustrated by the importance of tax
exemptions and tax evasion.
(iii) Institutional capacity. Burkina Faso's public institutions are weak, especially in the
implementation of the rule of law. Besides a major legal and judicial reform, the government
needs to strengthen its capacity for revenue mobilization, and to ensure that public resources are
allocated and spent in the most efficient and social equity oriented way.
(iv) A relatively closed economy exporting labor. In spite of the strong export performance,
particularly since the devaluation,the export rate remained the lowestin the region (11 percent of
GDP on average between 1994 and 1999) which partially explains Burkina Faso's structural
current account deficit (-16 percent of GDP in 1999). For the past decades, an important fraction
of Burkina Faso's workforce has migrated to coastal neighboring countries-especially Cote
d'Ivoire-to seize low wage job opportunities,a trend which also contributed to lower domestic
labor productivity.

27

Attachment 2
Burkina Faso's Poverty Profile
Poverty incidenceincreased slightly from 44.5 percent to 45.3 percent'2 during 1994-1998. Data
used for this poverty assessment come from two national surveys on household living standards
carried out in 1994 and 1998.'3 Depth of poverty (P1, defined as the percentage by which
consumption remains below the one correspondingto the poverty line) remained broadly stable
during the period, at 14 percent, which suggeststhat a large part of the poor population is close to
the poverty line. Larger households of over ten people tend to be poorer. Poverty incidence
increased in urban areas by more than 5 percentage points to 16 percent in 1998. In rural areas,
poverty incidence decreased slightly,by less that 1 percent.
However, poverty in Burkina Faso is still predomninatelyrural, accounting for 94.5 percent of
national poverty. The incidence of regional poverty varies widely. The cotton-growing western
region has the lowest incidence at 41 percent, and the center-north part of the country has the
highest incidence. The poor in the remoter areas lack access and information about markets. The
geographicalpattern of poverty is changing as a result of the reduction of poverty in the south,
southeast, and north, and the significant increase in the south-central region. Other research
illustrates large differences in equity patterns within regions, and across provinces. Evidently,
certain types of local-level institutionsare associated with lower inequality across villages. This
means that in the future the same level of growth could significantly accelerate poverty reduction
for these groups of villages.
PovertyIncidence(P0)and PovertyDepth(11)by Regions,1994and1998'
(Inpercent)
1994
P0

P1

1998
PO

P1

Regions
South Central

51.4

14.6

55.5

19.7

NorthCentral

61.2

20.9

61.2

18.2

Southeast

54.4

18.7

47.8

12.2

North

50.1

18.7

42.3

9.5

South
West

45.1
40.1

14.0
11.9

37.3
40.8

12.0
12.0

Urban
Rural

10.4
51.1

2.5
16.1

15.9
50.7

4.0
15.8

National

44.5

13.9

45.3

13.9

Source: Burkinab6authorities' Priority SurveyI and Priority SurveyII

' Povertvincidenceis measuredas the head countindexPO (thepercentageof a groupbelow the poverty line);Pl
to
remainsbelowthe one conresponding
representsthe depthof povertydefinedas the percentageby whichconsumption
thepovertyline.

Poverty increased for public and private wage earners, craftsmen, and merchants, and for other
employment. Between 1994 and 1998, poverty incidence decreased by 8 percentage points to
42 percent for cash crop farmers, but increased by 2 percentage points to 53 percent in 1998 for
food crop farmners.It is likely that the CFA franc devaluationbenefited some farmers, especially
cotton farmers, but had a negative impact on the purchasing power of wage earners.
12 Themethodusedto measurepovertywas identical,and,therefore,it is possibleto comparemost ofthe
of expenditureaggregatesis weakenedbecausethe datawerecollected
data. However,the comparability
duringtwo differentperiodsof the year.In addition,otherpovertyestimatesusingdifferentmethodologies,
andbasedon 1992and 1998demographicandhealthsurvey(DHS)data,showa slightdecreasein poverty.
13Thehouseholdlivingstandardswerecarriedout in 1994and 1998basedon a sampleof about8,500
householdsdistributedacrossten regions.Thedataare analyzedin the BurkinaFasopovertyprofile,
finalizedin May 2000.

28

BurkinaFaso:PovertyIncidenceby EconomicOccupation,
1994and1998
(Inpercent)
1994

1998

Economnic occupations

P0

Co

P0

CO

Public wage eamers

2.2

0.2

5.9

0.5

Privatewageeamers
Craftsmen and merchants
Other emnployment
Cash crop farners
Foodcropfarmers
Unemployed

6.7
9.8
19.5
50.1
51.5
41.5

0.4
1.4
0.3
11.8
78.9
7.1

11.1
12.7
29.3
42.4
53.4
38.7

0.7
1.6
0.4
15.7
77.1
4.0

Total
44.5
100.0
45.3
100.0
Source: Priority Survey I and Priority Survey II.
' Poverty incidence is measured as the head count indexP0 (the percentage of a group below the poverty
line). The contribution of each group to the total number of people below the poverty line is captared by the
index CO.

The most vulnerable groups are children, women, unemployed, and the elderly. There are 100
women for every 95 men on the absolute poverty threshold. HIV/AIDS is also creating a new
group of dependentpoor and increasing the stress on traditional networks of support.

29

Attachment 3

Key Structural Reforms Implemented under Previous CAS
Policy Measures
Fiscal reforms
Introduce WAEMU's product classification
Eliminate special intervention tax and introduce WAEMU's CET, lowering maximum
tariff rate from 37 percent to 25 percent
Eliminate special VAT payment procedures for importers of raw materials and for
enterprises registered under the investment code
Eliminate all remaining exemptions on public contracts and enhance monitoring of
taxation for foreign-financedprojects
Complete computerization of tax revenue collection, enhance monitoring of large
enterprises, and improve recovery from defaulters
Introduce a withholding tax at source on imports and purchases from wholesalersand
producers
Introduce a withholding tax at source on payment for services
Reduce the business profit tax from 40 percent to 35 percent
Computerize wage and public investment expenditure
Conduct review of public investment
Haxmonizethe budgetary system within the WAEMU framework
Civil service reform
Approve and implement law on civil service end- 1998
Approve and implement master plan for institutional reforms and modemization of
public administration including:
Introduction of merit-based promotion system
Larger recourse to contractual staff
Approve law on decentralization and deconcentration
Introduce a single personnel file, encompassing those of the Ministries of Finance
and of the Civil Service
Financial sector reform
Complete restructuration of the postal checking system and savings fund (CCPCNE), with separation of accounts from treasury and compensation between
treasury and the national postal office (Sonapost).
Strengthen the network of savings and loans cooperatives

Status
Done in April 1999
Done. Rate reduced to 20 percent in January 2000
Done
Done in June 1999
Done in 1999
Done in January 2000
Done in January 2000
Done in 2000
Ongoing
Conducted in 1998-99
Done
Approved in April 1998, and entered into force end-1998
Done in January 1999
Ongoing since 1999
Done in December 1998.Implementation ongoing
Done in March 2000

Done in June 2000.

Yearly audit of main savings and loans network since 1998:
unit responsible for enforcing PARMEC law strengthened.
1/
On the basis of new OHADA acts and the regulations of the banking commission, Done in 1997-99
strengthen rules applying to bank collateral,bank reserves, and effectivecapital
Business environment, legal and regulatory framework
Simplify business law in context of OHADA
1997-2000, ongoing
Increase recruitment of magistrates and computerize courts and tribunals
1997-2000, ongoing
Strengthen one-stop window (CPE) for private enterprises and streamline regulation Done in November 1997
by October 1997
Public enterprisesand privatization
Strengthen institutional framework for privatization, so as to speed up process
Done
Complete ongoing privatization of 41 enterprises
Privatize 21 enterprises
Done
Put up for sale or liquidate by Dec. 1997 8 entelprises
Done
Put remaining 12 enterprises up for sale by March 1998
Done with some delays
Review the strategy for the remaining enterprises in govemment portfolio
Done
Select four new companies for privatization in 1998
Done
In telecommunications,
grant two cellular phone licenses, and
Done in April 2000
operationalize regulatory agency
Done in March 2000
Approve privatization and liberalization of energy sector
Done
Agricultural policy
Phase out activities of state rice import company
Done in 1997-99
Adopt new agreement on producer price and profit-sharing mechanism for cotton
Done in March 1998
Adopt plan to open up the capital of SOFITEX to cotton producers and others
30 percent of
shares
acquired by
producers;
interprofessionalagreement signed in 1999
Complete reorganization of agricultural services of Ministry of Agriculture
Done in December 1998
1/ The PARMEC law was adopted in 1994,in the context of the WAEMU, regulating savings and loan cooperativesand their networks.

30

Attachment 4
An Econometric Model for Macroeconomic Simulations
The model was built in close collaboration with the Burkinabe authorities. It is designed
1.
for policy simulation in the context of a small dependent economy facing short and long-term
constraints to GDP growth. First, effective demand constitutes an important constraint on GDP
growth. In addition, a significant part of the Burkinabe economy is informal and an equally large
proportion of rural output - food products - is non-marketed. Second, foreign exchange
availability is a major constraint to growth. This is because Burkina Faso is a natural resource
poor agrarian country, particularly vulnerable to climatic shocks, which makes the economy very
dependent on imports, especially foods, durable consumer goods, oil products as well as capital
goods. Given that export propensity is very low (11 percent of GDP in 1999), the country is also
dependent on workers' remittances and foreign aid. Finally, Burkina Faso is a member of the
WAEMU. The fixed exchange rate system implies tight monetary policy, especially credit policy.
This constitutes a third constraint on short-term output growth. As a result, in the short run, real
income growth is constrainedby foreign exchange availability and domestic credit.
These constraints affect the various components of aggregate demand. Specifically,
2.
consumption depends on disposable income, real credit to the private sector and import capacity
because of food and durable consumer goods. Likewise, total investment depends on potential
output as well as import capacity since most capital goods are imported. Public consumption, net
transfer to the private sector and public investment are policy variables that are set according to
growth and distribution objectives as explained later. Imports depend on income and on the
country's relative competitivenessindicated by the real exchange rate, while exports are driven
by competitiveness as well as potential output. In the long run, output is determined according to
an endogenous growth model. Capacity depends on physical capital, human capital and total
factor productivity growth. The price level is determined via cost-push factors (import and
primary factor costs) and short-term demandpressure related to capacity utilization rate.
On the financial side, the model describes flows of funds for four economic agents, namely
3.
the private sector, the government, the monetary sector and the foreign sector. The public sector
comprises the central government as well as the local administrations. The monetary sector
comprises the central bank and deposit money banks and the private sector the rest of the
economy (households and non-monetary financial institutions). The money market is described
via supply and demand activities. The demand for money depends on real income and expected
inflation. Policy targets on gross foreign reserves, bank credit to the private sector and to the
government are specified, so that changes in net foreign liabilities clear the money market. As to
the government sector, public consumption and investment are set as policy targets as indicated
above. Meanwhile, Government revenue is derived from taxes and exogenously specified levels
of grants. The variation in foreign loans to the public sector ensures the financing of the public
sector resource gap. With a fixed nominal exchange rate, a target on gross foreign reserve of the
Central Bank and all other foreign financing items pre-determined, balance of payments closure
may require some short term borrowing, which is considered short term public liability.
Scenario of Moderate Growth.
This scenario assumes the continuationof current adjustment policies in the context of low
4.
level worldwide inflation and moderate international interest rates (5 percent). We assume a
moderate increase in export prices while import prices will remain stable around the inflation rate
of OECD countries-as a whole there is a 2 percent improvement in the terms of trade over the
projection period. We assume a slight depreciation of the exchange rate (2.5 percent) consistent
with a strong dollar and low inflation in the zone. We assume that the BCEAO will adopt a
cautious monetary policy to maintain inflation within the WAEMU's convergence target.
31

Attachment 4
Domestic credit is projected to expand by 2 percent above the inflation rate. We project an
increase in net foreign assets aiming at maintaining gross foreign reserves at a minimum of 8
months of imports. Workers' remittances are expected to increase by 10 percent over the period
2000-03 and partly offset the deterioration of the current account balance. This trend is in line
with sub-regional GDP growth. We assume the deepening of financial intermediation and a
favorable environment which will create investment opportunities and attract external savings.
5.
Fiscal policy remains prudent with direct and indirect tax rate of respectively 3 and 5
percent of GDP. By contrast, we have adjusted indirect tax import rates to take into consideration
the implementation of the custom unions in WAEMU countries as of January 2000. We used as a
benchmark the average import tariff in the zone estimated at 12 percent given product
classification and the new CET structure. We project a steady increase of capital expenditure of 5
percent so that the government can continue its effort to improve basic infrastructure and human
capital. Simultaneously, public consumption will rise by about 2 percent following additional
recruitment in priority social sectors and extra recurrent costs generated by the increased volume
of public investment.
6.
Simulation results indicate that in this scenario, real GDP growth will average 4.5 percent
per annum over the projection period (2000-2005).The inflation rate will stabilize slightly below
the WAEMU target at around 2.4 percent. There will be a slight improvement of external and
internal balances. At this annual rate of 4.5 percent of real GDP growth and given the
current elasticity of poverty reduction with respect to mean income (about 1.5), the poverty
headcount index will only decrease by about 1.5 points per year, which would not allow
Burkina Faso to achieve the OECD 2015 developmentgoals.
High Growth Scenario.
7.
Reducing poverty in Burkina Faso will require a more ambitious development scenario.
The PRSP presents such a high growth scenario, with a target for the average annual real GDP
growth rate in 2000-03 of 7.4 percent. To reach this target, the government of Burkina Faso plans
to implement a two-pronged strategy: (i) a more flexible macroeconomic framework; and (ii) a
structural reform program aiming at opening-up the economy to regional and world markets and
to significantly reducing input and transaction costs.
8.
A more flexible macroeconomicframework: The government has articulated the country's
poverty reduction strategy and a comprehensive action plan that identifies priority sectoral
policies to be pursued in support of poverty reduction, including in the areas of education and
health. The first step should be afull costing of the envisagedpoverty reduction strategy, both
with regard to public spending requirements and to changes in the tax system. The second step
would involve taking into consideration the scope for financing budgetary expenditure through
net domestic borrowing in light of the need to maintain macroeconomic stability as prescribed by
the WAEMU and BCEAO. The third step would be to assess thescope for externalfinancing be
it in the form of grants, net external borrowing, or debt relief. After having carried out the
assessment of the external and internal resources, policy makers could then determine whether the
desired poverty reduction strategy can be financed in a manner consistent with the country's
growth and stability objectives.
9.
The model is a useful tool to conduct thisiterative process. Policy targets on government
spending (public consumnptionand investment as defined in the PRSP) and policy targets on gross
foreign reserves, bank credit to the private sector and to the government (as dictated by the
WAEMU and BCEAO rules) are specified. The model calculates the changes in net foreign
liabilities necessary to clear the money market and the public sector resource gap. Given the fixed
32

Attachment 4
norninal exchange rate, a target on gross foreignreserve of the Central Bank and all other foreign
financing items pre-determined, the balance of payments closure may require some short term
borrowing. If there remains an imbalance between expenditure and expected financing that
jeopardizes the country's macroeconomic growth and stability objective as stipulated in the
WAEMU treaty, one option would be to ascertain the extent to which the additional external
financing may be available. If the desired poverty reduction program cannot be reconciled with
the country's economic stability and growth objectives, then policy makers will need to
reconsider the various parameters specifiedinitially specified.
10. Implementing a Bold Structural Reform Agenda. The second pillar of the strategy is to
remove all constraints to private sector development and accelerate the pace of Burkina Faso's
integration into the regional and world economy. This includes diversifying the economy to
establish a strong foundation for sustained growth in view of the vulnerability of the country to
external shocks; investing in human resources: This will imply a boost in both current and
capital expenditures over the horizon 2005;bringingdown gradually the high costs of electricity,
telecommunications,and transport;improvingtaxation of the informal sector, reducing corporate
income tax and tightening of the exemptions under the investment code;deepening financial
intermediationand increasing access to microfinance savings and loan institutions, especially for
the poorest and for women. These reforms would lower transaction and input costs, enhance the
competitiveness of the economy, attract foreigndirect investment, increase exports, and stimulate
private sector development.Such growth-enhancingand poverty-reducingpolicy agenda boosts
private sector and partners' confidence. We assume an increase in foreign direct investment and
portfolio investment growth over the projection period. Foreign transfers to the private sector will
also improve. Foreign donors will also support the government strategyby providing additional
current and capital grants. We project a slight CFA depreciation with respect to the dollar (as in
the scenario of moderate growth) and an improvement in the terms of trade over the projection
period.
11. Following the increase in public human capital expenditures and stronger private sector
activity after the reduction in factor costs, corporate income tax, and increased productivityreal
GDP growth rises steadily over the medium-term to reach 7.7 percent in 2005 and inflation
is contained at about 2.6 percent, (slightly below the WAEMU target of 3 percent). With a
poverty elasticity of about 1.5, the poverty headcount ratio would be reduced by about 30
percent (15 points).

33

Attachment 5
CAS Formulation: A Participatory Process
In the process of CAS preparation and formnulation,we have organized throughout 1999 and early 2000
consultations with Burkinabe officials, academic experts, private businessmen, local UN agency heads,
multilateral and bilateral program directors, and the representatives of many NGOs and community groups.
To initiate the process, we held a Country team retreat in Washington in January 1999, opened to other
donors working in Burkina Faso, and to two senior officials representing the Government. In the summer of
1999, we held workshops in Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso,and Tenkodogo to consult with representatives
of the administration in the country side and civil society groups. We invited interested groups and
individuals to advise the Bank on identification of development priorities and formulation of its assistance
strategy for Burkina Faso. The agenda, participation, and conduct of the meetings were left to organizers.
Written talking points, notes and other background material for these meetings were prepared by the
Government. Finally, in September 2000, a French version of the draft of the CAS was shared with the
burkinab6 authorities and the donors. Their views and recommendations were fully taken into consideration
in the final version of the document.
The meetings held throughout the preparation process of the CAS varied somewhat in quality, but the
response was uniformly positive, the discussions were often lively but always constructive, and some ideas
merging from these brainstorming sessions have been incorporated into this new CAS. While the discussion
of priorities and suggestions for future Bank action in Burkina Faso tended to reflect the specific interests of
each social group, there were some points in common. These have included an understanding of the need to
improve the competitiveness of the Burkinabe economy through major reforms of the utilities (electricity,
water, telecommunications), and to redefine the role of the state and to limit public expenditures to sectors
where market failure cannot be corrected otherwise. High priority was given to reducing the human capital
deficit-with particular emphasis on raising the health and education levels in the rural areas-and to
improving governance through better public finance management, greater decentralization of decisionmaking and of control over program execution, and increased account ability of all Government officials.
The process emnphasizedthe need to maintain flexibility in the implementation of the Bank program. During
the various workshops organized in 1999, the joint Bank-Government teams agreed on strategic priorities
and adopted three criteria to be used for defining the medium-term Bank program: (i) impact of the strategy
on the overall growth and poverty reduction objective; (ii) institutional viability and degree of ownership;
and (iii) comparative advantage of the Bank. It was agreed that these criteria would serve as guiding
principles to design Bank assistance and to make adjustments to the program if circumstances change during
the CAS implementation period.
The CAS preparation process had clear benefits. Government officials and Bank staff were encouraged by
the participants' awareness of the need for a faster pace of reforms. The discussions also revealed major
information gaps and therefore, the need for well thought through communication strategies for privatization
programs and public administration reform, for example. It has been agreed with Government that this CAS
process should contribute to the information/comnnunicationeffort through further dissemination activities.
The approved CAS document will be widely distributed and discussed in the country (all development
stakeholders, local and international media, political parties, Economic and Social Council, economic
commission of the National Assembly). Finally, these CAS discussions have shown that therelationship
between the Government and the Bank has gained in confidence over the past three years.

34

Attachment 6
Burkina Faso's Gender Profile
Indicator

I
Female
1. HUMANCAPITALASSETS

Male

Health

LifeExpectancy
atBirth
CrudeBirthRate(per1,000people)
InfantMortality
Rate(per1,000livebirths)
Maternal
Mortality
FertilityRate(womenaged15-49)
Prevalence
ofFemaleGenitalCutting(FGC)(%)
HIV/Aids
AdultHIVPrevalence(%of populationaged15-49)
HIVPrevalenceRatein YoungPeople(Age15-24)High
Estimate(%)
Adults(15-49)LivingwithHIV/AIDS
TotalNumberof PeopleCuwfently
Infected
AIDSOrphans(Cumulative)
WomenAttendingAntenatalClinics(%infected)
FemaleSex Workers;MaleSDTpatients(%infected)

54
45
105
484
6.8
66
6.44
7.51

3.33

180,000

150,000
350,000
320,000

7.4
58.2

41.8

AdultLiteracyRate(15+)
GrossPrimaryEnrollnentRate(%of agegroup)
Shareof SecondaryEnrollments(%)
Shareof TertiaryEnrollments
(%)
Progressionto Grade5 (%of cohort)

12.9
34
35
23
68

24.8
46.7
65
77
71

2. ECONOMIC ASSETS
AdultLaborForce(%)
Agricultural
LaborForce(%)
Administrative
& ManagerialLaborForce(%)
LandOwnership(%)
HouseholdHeadship,Rural(%) Total

47
>50
14
<6
7

53
<50
86
>94
93

Education

3. SOCIAL CAPITALASSETS
Representation
in Parliament,1999(%)
8
Representation
in Cabinet 1999
10
Representation
in LocalGovernment(%)
10
MeanAge at firstmarriage(years)
17
Sources: PRSP, Demographicand Health Survey 1999,LTNAIDS,
UNDP, vauiousstudies.

35

92
90

90
27

Attachment 7
Collaborationwith DevelopmentPartners
During CAS preparation informationwas collectedby donor and sector on past transfers, as well as
4 . The difficulty in gathering basic data and producing a summary matrix of the
projected conmmitments1
nature and volume of aid from the various donors highlighted the administration's limited institutional
capacity to manage foreign assistance on the basis of a properly informed decision-makingprocess. It
suggestedthat both coordinationand trackingof aid will require capacity buildingon the part of Government
and simplificationof procedures on the part of donors. A critical element in this effort will be to develop
adequate mechanisms to monitor and evaluate the impact of external assistance. For details, see donor
activitiesin Annex B 1.
Donors(excludingIDA)
Total disbursements (1996-98)and Projected Commitments (1999-2002)
($ million)

Rural Dev/
Environ

Sector

1996-1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

207.7
62.1
63.7
49.2
38.4

Educatlon

63.3
14.1
23.2
21.9
21.1

Health

66.1
14.9
14.7
10.6
10.0

Transporti
Infrastructure

135.7
30.2
30.6
45.7
30.2

Energy

58.1
15.3
11.8
21.6
14.2

Water

Instit
Dvlpt

82.4
69.9
55.1
24.8
33.0

4 Detailed information by donor and sector is available at Direction Generale de la Cooperation.

36

175.1
42.3
27.4
29.8
35.8

Other

Total

40.4
10.2
10.3
6.4
6.1

828.9
258.9
236.8
210.0
188.8

Attachment 8
5
PerformanceMonitoringFrameworkl
Policy Domain
1. Macroeconomic
Framework and
Poverty Reduction

*
*
*

Key Monitoring Indicators
Real GDP growth
Real exchange rate
Number of people below the

*
*

povertyline
2. Education

3. Health

4. Governance

Private Sector
Development

Grossenrohnentrate for girls/total *
enrolmentrate
* Gross enrolrent rate in he least
*
privilegedrural areas
*
* Average cost per child in primary
*
school
* Vaccinationcoverageratio (in %)
*
- BCG
- DTCP3
- Measles
*
* -Yellow fever
*
* Essentialdrugs breakdownrate (%) *
*

Cornpletionof year-endbudget
executionreports (lois de
reglement)and transmissionto the
SupremeAudit Court (Cour des
Comptes)and to Parliament.
* Share of budget effectively
reachingthe most decentralized
departments.
* Half-yearlyopinionpolls:
- of users of governmentservices
(Healtheducation);
-of economicagents on government
tendors (procurementprocedures,
settlementdelays)

*

*

*

*

*

*

Public enterprisedivestiture
Number of new ventures
Foreign direct investtnent

*

*

*
*

Monitoring Instruments
Review of the structural reforn program every
six months
Review of public expenditure management

everyyear
Poverty profilesevery two years
Publicationof theAnnuaire scolairre every
year;
Publicexpenditurereview in 2000 and 2002
Incidenceanalyseseverytwo years
Annual Surveys
Consolidatedyearly reportsby the MOH on
vaccinationrates and staffingfor each calendar
year,to be audited and valdated by INSD
Publicexpenditurereview in 2000 and 2002
Incidenceanalysesevery two years
Independentaudit of CAMEO records on drug
stocks everyyear
Disseminationby March 31, 2001, to all
district authorities,and organizationof
workshopswithlocal authoritiesand civil
society
Annual surveys
Annual surveyof decentralizedunits on the
status of allottedbudget execution

Monitoringof the agreed program
AnnualReports from various sources
Surveys

15 Thefollowingtableof monitoringindicatorsdrawsuponthe PRSPindicatorsadoptedin the frameworkof the SPA
pilotinitiativeon Reformulated
Conditionality.
37

Attachment 9
Combating HIV/AIDS
Burkina Faso has the second highestHIV/AIDSinfectionrates in West Africa. The InternationalPartnership
for Action Against AIDS has identified Burkina Faso as one of the priority countries in the Africa region.
With an overall HIV prevalence rate of 6.4 percent, the country is in the generalizedphase of the epidemic.
HIV infection rates amongst high-risk groups are dramnaticallyhigher: TB patients: 34 percent; STD clinic
patients: 23 percent; cormmercialsex
workers: 35 percent. The age groups
CumulativeNumberof ReportedAIDS
most affected are adults in their most
Cases, 1986-99
productive years and young girls (1324). The main mode of transmission is

20000

heterosexualintercourse with perinatal
transmission on the rise. Geographic

14000

areas characterized by heavy internal

12000

and external migratory flows are
disproportionately affected, to the

8000

extent

heavy

4000

concentration of individuals and
changes in sexual behavior. As can be

0

seen

that

from

there

the

is

exhibit

a

above

the

16000

6000l

,

~

'99

~

,pll l

~

cumulative number of reported AIDS
Year
cases has increased rapidly over the _
past decade, reaching about 18,000in 1999. TheseAIDS cases are believed to represent only a fraction of
the actual cases.
The governmentof Burkina Faso realizes the gravity of the HIV/AIDSepidemic and has been proactive in
implementinga series of national plans. Since the emergenceof the firstAIDS cases in 1986 there has been
a growing political conmiitment,an intensificationof the scope and range of interventions,and a substantial
growth in the level of financial resources being channeled for the HIV/AIDSprogram. The government's
own contributionrose from only US10,000duringthe first phase to close to US$2.5million during the most
recent plan. The IDA-fundedPopulationand AIDS Control Project has provided one of the key sources of
funding for the 1996-2000HIV/AIDS Plan. The recently prepared 2001-2005 HlV/AIDS Multi-sectoral
Plan emphasizes the need for strengthening partnerships, promoting participatory approaches, and
empoweringdecentralized authorities to take a lead in the fight against this disease. The plan provides a
soundbasis for future Bank assistance.
IDA has adopted the followingstrategies for providing support to the government in the fight against this
devastating pandemic: (i) mainstreaming HIV/AIDS activities into all areas of IDA assistance, with a
particularfocus in the short-termon retrofitting on-goingoperations;(ii) continuingour policy dialoguewith
Burkinabeauthorities to ensure that HIPC funds are targeted for critical HIV/AIDS activities;(iii) ensuring
that funds from the on-going Population and AIDS Control Project are effectively used for priority
interventions;and (iv) preparing a fast track HIV/AIDSDisasterResponse Project. With regard to the latter,
Bank managementhas expressed a strong commitmnent
to supportingauthorities in their effort to access the
US$500million Multi-CountryHIV/AIDSProgramfor the Africaregion (MAP) in an effort to scale up their
national program. The HIV/AIDS Disaster Response operation would be used as the main vehicle for
channeling funds for the multi-sectoraland communitydriven fight against HIV/AIDS. In addition, the
Bank is supporting the Ministry of Health in undertaking a sector-wide approach for financing priority
activitiescoveredin its 10-yearhealth sector developmentprogram, includingpriority HIV/AIDSactivities.

38

Attachment 10
Core Labor Standards
The 1962Labor Code has been amendedseveral times during the past decade, most recently in 1996.Under
this legislation, workers, including civil servants, traditionally have enjoyed a legal right of association,
which is recognized under the Constitution-essential workers, such as police, may not join unions. There
are four major labor confederations and twelve autonomous trade unions linked together by a national
confederal committee. They represent a wide ideological spectrum. Labor unions may affiliate freely with
intemational trade unions. The National Confederationof Burkinabe Workers (CNTB) is affiliated with the
Brussels-basedWorld Confederationof Labor.
Unions have the right to bargain for wages and other benefits, both directly and with employers and with
industry associations.These negotiationsare governedby minimums on wages and other benefits contained
in the InterprofessionalCollective Convention and the CommercialSector Collective Convention,which are
establishedwith Governmentparticipation.If no agreementis reached, employeesmay exercise their right to
strike. Either labor or managementmay refer an impasse in negotiationsto labor tribunals. Appeals may be
pursued through the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court, whose decision is binding on both parties.
Collectivebargaining is extensive in the modern wage sector, but it encompassesonly a small percentage of
workers.
The law prohibits forced labor and there are no reports of its use. The Labor Code sets the minimum age for
employmentat 14 years, the average age for completion of basic primary school. However, the Ministry of
Employment, Labor, and Social Security, which oversees labor standards, lacks the means to enforce this
provision adequately, even in the small wage sector. Children commonly work with their parents in family
subsistence farms in rural areas or in small businesses and the informal sector in urban areas. The Labor
Code mandates a minimum monthly wage, a standard workweek of 40 hours for nondomestic workers and
60 hours for household workers. The minimum monthly wage in the formal sector, about $45 (CFAF
27,089), does not apply to subsistenceagriculture,which employs over 80 percent of the population. The law
establishes safety and health standards at the workplace. However, the Government's Labor Inspector Corps
does not have sufficient resources to fulfill its duties adequately.

39

Annex A2

BurkinaFaso at a glance
Burkina
Faso

SubSaharan
Africa

LowIncome

11.6
230
2.7

642
500
321

2,417
410
988

2.8
21

2.6
2.6

1.9
2.3

45.3
17
54
105
33
78
81
41
46.7
34.7

34
50
92
32
43
39
78
85
71

31
60
77
43
64
39
96
102
86

1979

1989

1998

1999

1.5

2.4

9.3
-3.1

10.3
7.1

2.6
29.6
14.0
12.7
19.6

2.6
27.8
13.0
9.8
15.2

0.7
30.4
9.7

-14.5
0.2
54.7
16.6

-16.0

0.3
19.0
3.2

276.0

279.0
1999403

POVERTYand SOCIAL
1999
Population,mid-year(millions)
GNP per capita (Atlasmethod, US$)
GNP (Atlasmethod,US$ billions)

1113/00

Developmentdiamond
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993,99
Population(%f)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199349)
Poverty (Y. of populationbelow nationalpoverty line)
Urban populabtion
(% of total population)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition(% of children under5)
Access to improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% of populationage 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population)
Male
Female

GNP
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to safe water

-Burkina
Faso
Low-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS

GDP (USSbillions)
Gross domesticinvestmentUGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP
Gross nationalsavings/GDP
Current account balance/GDP
InterestpaymentsWGDP
Total debWGDP
Total debt service/exports
Presentvalue of debtWGDP
Presentvalue of debt/exports

Economicratios*
Trade

Domestic
Savings

Investment

59.9
23.3
Indebtedness

(averageannualgrowth)
GDP
GNP per capita
Exports of goods and services

197949 1989-99

1998

1999

3.8
1.0
1.2

6.2
3.4
44.7

5.8
2.9
-16.2

5.8
2.4
6.3

1979

1989

1998

1999

34.2
22.8

31.8
23.9

32.0
27.8

31.3
28.3

43.0

44.3

40.1

40.4

90.9
12.2
30.9

78.9
14.0
24.9

73.0
14.3
30.9

76.7
13.6
29.4

197949 1989-99

1998

1999

-2.1

-

Burkina Faso
Low-incomegroup

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agricuiture
Industty
Manufacturing2
Services
Private consumption
Generalgovernmentconsumption
Importsof goods and services

(averageannualgrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
Generalgovernmentconsumption
Gross domesticinvestment
Importsof goods and services
Gross national product

3.6
4.1
2.3
4.5

3.3
3.5

5.5
10.9

3.1
10.8

3.5

4.1

6.7

2.9
7.0

3.3
2.8
5.9
2.6

64
8.2
23.5
32.1
6.3

7.6
-1.3
-5.8
-5.7
5.8

2.8

GrowthofinvestmentandGDPlI)
so
4
20
0
0
o40
GDt

GDP

Growthof exportsand imports(%)
so
40..

20.i

3.8

e

_.

i0

95

98

8

Exports

olmports

Note: 1999 data are preliminaryestimates.
The diamondsshow four key indicatorsin the country(in bold) comparedwih its income-groupaverage. If data are missing,the diamondwill
be incomplete.

40

Annex A2

Burkina Faso
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1979

1989

1998

1999

-0.3

1.0

3.2

-1.1
-1i4

10.0
-1.0
-

13.1
4.0
-10.0

15 0
52
-12.0

1989

1998

1999

325
206
46

255
136
48

700

639

600

30*

72
196

102
221

100
0

98
104
95

101
105
97

Domestic
prIc s
(%change)

InfiltIon (%)
30

A

25

Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator

Government
fnance
(%of GDP,excludingcurrentgrants)
Current revenue
Current budgetbalance
Overallsurplusldefick

20

Is
0
-4

94

95

-GDP

9f

deflator

98

97

0

99

CPI

TRADE
(US$millions)

1979

Total exports(fob)
Cotton
Meat
Manufactures
Total imports(ci')

Food

.

143

..

Fuel endenergy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Importpriceindex (1995=100)

..

..

Termnsoftrade(1995=100)

Export and Importlevels (USSmill)

JJ

Bo0
5s0
400

74 200d
93

94

95

aExports

9

97

90

99

UImports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
Current account balanceto GDP(%)

1979

1989

1998

1999

174

244

364

292

491
-316

587
-343

803
-439

760
-467

Net income
Net current transfers

N/A
83

N/A
140

-12
190

-13
155

-10

Current account balance

N/A

N/A

-261

-326

-12

N/A

NIA

227
33

310
15

1
-18

..

212.7

266
319.0

373
585.2

407
560.6

1979

1989

1998

1999

295
0
65

717
0
255

1,358

1,452

710

753

9
0
0

39
0
3

74
10

11

137
49
13
2
0

116
79
3
0
0

240

13

14
19
0
19
0
19

63
25
1
24
2
22

15
58
11
47
5
42

(US$millions)

Exportsof goodsandservices
Imports of goods and services
Resourcebalance

Financingitems (net)
Changes in net reserves

Memo:
Reservesincluding gold (US$millions)
Conversionrate (DEC,local/US$)

o 1

101

1111

-2

_

_

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

millions)
(UJS$
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composiion of net resoumeflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
Word Bankprogram
Commitments
Disbursements
Prindpalrepayments
Netflows
Interestpayments
Net transfers

Composffionof 1998debt (US$mill.)

D:648
B:710

0
0
30
63
6

A-IBRD
B - IDA

E-Bilateral
D- Othermuftilateral F - Private

57
5
52
11/3100

DeveiopmentEconomics

41

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003
Diagnosis and Development

objectives of the PRSP

Government's

Strategy/Actions

1
J

Selecd Bank and Government
efrmneIndicators

0oNjctive 1: Aeceiate
1.1 Maintain a Stable Macroeconoxmic
Framnework

-Consolidate
recent gains in
macroeconosnic management and move
beyond stabilization to deeper
structural reforms and sustained
economic growth.

- Focus on reforTmsto improve the

comipetitiveness of the economy and to
facilitate the country's integration into
the regional and world economny

tQ

1.2 Increase the Competitiveness of
the Econom and Reduce Factor Costs

Bank Group Instruments

Timing

Activities of Other Donors

JRqilty-Baed Growth

of a stable
macroeconomice environment, that will
ensure a sustained growth and a
sustanable fiscal and external position,
as evidenced by continued strong
perforsnance under a program
supported by an arrangement under dhe
PRGF
-Maintenance

- Satisfactory assessment by Bank staff

of the authorities' annual reports on
imiplementation of the PRSP
4j-

jand
LENDING
-

PRSC-1(FY01)

- PRSC2 (FY03)

Budgetary slupport and support to
balance ofpayments (European Union,
Denmiark, Switzerland, Netherlands)

NON-LENDING
- Capacity building for economfic
monitoring (miacro modeling and
forecasting techniques) (FYOI-02-03)
-Technical assistance to the National
Statistics Institute (INSD) (FYOI-0203)

(i) lower the unit labor cost by
adjusting the minimum wage and
LENDING
reducing the welfare costs home by
- Competitiveness and Enterprise
fornal sector enterprises;
Developmient (FY02)
ji2:ji::T:i EiiESi:i:
i iiiiifHiS)iS
ii:g iS:E::
7rii::iiiSEig::fi:i:i:
: ::::EiEi:,EFRii
i :::iiEiCEgi
ifE-....................................................................................
Ei:L7
i :::i:fiii77hRiLiFiSi
i:i:iT::
::::7::
ii:Ri
LiL::::
(ii) increase\QXji00i
the efficiency
ofpusblic
0t;;lf 0|$
:$j);0X;;Q}29
j 0 j 0 t:0W83
)\;; Qi:000$t
0000j00lllX0)$9));000t0juij
|)t}0X):XQ
e ive1; j);Q;; 0Q0|9000|;lllllti
t
e
ll} e).
.* w t T 0 tI-.
investment by acting on the
recommendations of the study on
reform of the Public Investment
Progra (PIP);
(iii) accelerate development of financial
markets;
(iv) trade liberalization;
(v) privatize existing state interests;
(vi) strengthen the Governmnents
regulatory capacity;
(vii) liberalize the cotton rector and
encourage new entrants
I-

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Strategy/Actions

Diagnosbis and Devel P
Objectives of the PRSP

Goverunent's

1.3 Support to Improve the Growth

Agriculture/Livestock

Potential of Specific Productive Sectors (i) Create a legal framework conducive
to the emergence of professional
agricultural organizations
(ii) Support these organizationsin
setting up an effective charnberof
agriculture;
(iii) Train organizationmembers
(iteracy, management, rural trades) to
improve their productivity;
(iv) Create a framework designed to
spurprivate investment in the
agricultural sector,
(v) Improve marketing channelsfor
inputs and agricultural products in
order to boost the competitivenessof
sectors with a high potential for

Activities of Other Donors

Rank Group Instruments
and Timing

andiaovere
Seletemane
Performnance Indicators
Increase in the volume and value of

PORTFOLIO

non-traditional agriculturalexports

-

Agricultural Services II
Private Irrigation
LENDING
- Conmunity-based Rural
Development (FY01)
NON LENDING
- Support to implementation of Rural
Development Strategy
- Full PER (FY0 1)
- Support for poverty monitoring and
follow up of PRSP implemenitation
(FY0I-02-03)

Statistical surveys (Netherlands);

Food Security (Germany);
. CommunityDevelopment (Denmark;
Genmany;AFDB; BOAD, Belgium and
IFAD; IDB; OPEC Fund);
-

Water & Soil Conservation, Forestry
(IFAD);
-

Strengtheningof animal health
Serdces (Eupean Development
-

Sanitary control (EDF);
Gounna Livestock Development
Project (BADEA)
-

growth;

(vi) Set up a regulatory fraznework
favoring contract agriculture.
Water
Improving the living conditions of the
population in the capital city by
increasing, in the long run, the quantity
and quality of potable water available
in capital city and strengthening the
utility company (ONEA)
Urban
Provision of priority uwban
infrastructure and servicesin urban
centers and secondary cities

LENDING
- Ouagadougou Water Supply (FY01)

PORTFOLIO
- Urban Environment
LENDING
- Usban Environment supplemental
(FY02)

XD

tP4

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

overnmesit's Strategy/Actions

Development
Diagosmband
Dibgectivs othPRPPerformance

4-

IActivities
and Timing

Indicators

PORTFOLIO
- Mining Sector Capacity Building and
Environment

Nbning
Strengthen and deepen the regulatory
and fiscal reforms, build capacity in
public and private sector agencies,
complete geological and environmental
databases.
Energy
Introduce private sector participaton to
improve the efficiency of the provision
of electricity and rural telephony
services and the supply of hydrocarbon
products to the economy, increasing
access to universal infrastructure
services.
Transport/Infrastructure
(i) Increase public investment
efficiency, (ii) improve road transport
productivity and distribution
mechanisms, (iii) strengthen
management and policy
implementation capacity of the public
sector to ensure adequate knowledge
and monitoring of sector performance.
Industry
(i) Simplify the official procedures for
investing and establishing an enterprise
(ii) Revise the tax system
(iii) Create an infornation and
documentation center to facilitate the
gathering, processing, and
dissemination of economic and
business information
(iv) Make private sector support
programs more effec6ive
(v) Reinforce judicial mechanisms to
help comnbatfraud
(vi) Consolidate the legal framework
for business by creating and
strengthening commercial tribunals.
Tourism
(i) Develop "Sea-Sahel" tourist circuits
(ii) Develop specialized tours ( e.g.
nature treks or hunting tours in the
Paina, Arly, orNahouri reserves)

PORTFOLIO
- RPTES Program
LENDING
- Energy Sector Reform Operation
(FY02)

NON LENDING
- Full PER (FY01)

LENDING
- Competitiveness and Enterpeise
Development (FY02)

_
:777
7:r7E
7.r77r7t

dA;

j

:

:::

?

:

? es

:

t:

77

:

!
:e::
L::Socia\Wll
i li)Serv4ices
:T VS tes itt Baste;-itlsl'oo
::E.:ySbam.............................
i:tha0:::titL
Guaidrant:E::::ditE0(E:iteeiiii
iiC
~~~Objetb'.2

f iSi iffS:

r

E

of Other Donors

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)
Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the PRSP
2.1 Promote access ofthe poor to
education

Ln
2.2 Promote Access of the Poor to
Health Services

Government's

(i) Increase education's share of public
expenditures and ensure the
decentralized hiring of primary school
teachers
(ii) Implement institutional refonns
within the MEBA and increase
efficiency in the use ofpublic funds in
education
(iii) Identify specific steps to benefit
the poorest and most vulnerable groups
(iv) Establish permanent literacy and
traininig centers or non-formal basic
educational centers; and implement
projects directed at women
(v) Incorporate literacy training in a
wider set of activities and services (such
as health, education, credit, and
extension services)
(vi) Achieve abetter balance between
various levels of the education system
to lay the foundation for needs of
future workforce
(i) Grant top priority to the health
problems of the poorest segments of the
population (e.g. expansion of
vaccination program, promotion of
women and child health, combating
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, optimize
the use of human resources in rural
areas)
(ii) Make essential health care
affordable (e.g. ensure availability of
essential medications and vaccines in
the CSPS, lower the cost of
preventative medicines, develop local
solidarity mechanisms by establishing a
legal frarnework for mutual health
insurance mechanisms)
(iii) Support the participation of users
and communities in the development
and management of health care
activities (e.g. develop communitybased strategies, strengthen the powers
of local

management

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators

Strategy/Actions

committees)

- Progress towards PRSP's quantitative
objectives for

*

Gross enrollment rate for
girls/total enrollment

*

Gross enrollment rate in the least
privileged rural areas

*

First-year enrollment rate (CP1)

I

Activities of Other Donors

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing

- Improving quality of education
(Canada)

PORTFOLIO
- Post Primary

- School meals (Cathwel-CRS)
LENDING
- Basic Education (FY02)
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY01)

- Non formal education (UNICEF;
Netherlands)

NON LENDING
- Vocational training strategy (FY03)

- Secondary School Infrastructures
(AFDB)
- Training of technical secondary
teachers (Austria)

- girls

ruareas
-20 poorest provinces
*

- Support to Ouagadougou University
(Belgium; Netherlands; France)

Literacy rate

- Construction ofclassrooms and
lodging for teachers, ENEP (AFDB;
OPEC Fund; UNICEF; Netherlands;
IDB; Belgium)

- Women
- Percentage of literate women in
the 20 poorest provinces

*

Average cost per childin primary

school
Progress towards PRSP's quantitative
indicators:
*

Vaccination coverage ratio (in %)
- BCG
- DTCP3
- Measles
-Yellow fever

*

Rate of use of health facilities:
number of new contacts per
person and per year in first level
health centers (CSPS, CMA)

*

Essential drugs breakdown rate
(%)

*

Cost ofmedical interventions in
first level health centers

- Family Planning and fight against

PORTFOLIO
- Health and Nutrition
-Population and Aids

STD-AIDS (US-AID, Germany; WHO;
UN-AIDS)
- Promotion of essential generic drugs
(Netherlands; Germany; France)

LENDING
- Aids Response (FY0 1)
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY0 1)

- Targeted budgetary support
(European Union and Netherlands
- Rural Water (Denmark, Germany,
Netherlands; UNICEF

P
to

X
.

.

_

BURKINA FASO: COUTNTRYASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)
Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the PILSP
2.3 Promote Access of the Poor to
Water

Government's

Strategy/Actions

(i) Boost access to drinking water by
developing 3,000 modern water points,

Bank Group Instruments
and Timiing

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators
- Progress towards PRSP's quantitative
objectives foT Drinking Wat.er supply

Activities of Other Donors

LENDING
- Comimunity-Based Rural
Developmient (FY0 1)

infissstnucture and in mnanagingthe
facilities,
(iii) Establishing a legal and regulatory
frameworkccovering all administrative
levels and including principles to govern
administratiou of the sector (ganting of
usage perminits,used water discharge
permnits, mates,standards, etc.).

dIncme

Objective 3: EPMandOpruiiarEpomnnd

41

3.1 Reduce the vulnerability, of
agricultural activities
C71

(i) Increased adoption of soil
fertility/water conservation technologies

(i) Soil fertility nmanagement
Promote the development
~~~~~~~~(ii)

of small-

scale agricultural water
supply/irrigation systema

(i) Improve research and its linkages
with extension

the Poor

PORTFOLIO
- GEPRENAF (GEF)
- Private Inigation
LENDING
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY01)
- Sahel Lowland Ecosystemn
ManaLgement (GEF)
Aquifer Initiative (GEF)
-Shallow
(GEF)
-PRONAGEN

(iii) Enhance land tenure security

3.2 Intensify' and modernize
agricultr

Generitlonfar.

PORTFOLIO
(i) Farm mnechanization rate

-Agricultural
-Private

Services II
Irrigation

2010

(ii) Imiprove access to equipment and
inAputs

2000
35%65%/

(iii) Support for producer's
organizations and conmwodity
associations

(ii) Increase in miillet/sorghum yields

LENDING
- Community-Biased Rural
Development (FY01)

Fight against Desertification, Soil
Erosion (European Union; Switzerland;
Netherlands)

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)
Diagnosis and Development
objectives of the PRSP

3.3 Increase and diversify rural income

3.4 Open up Rural Areas

Government's Strategy/Actions

(i) Expand the geographic reach of the
decentralized financial system
(ii) Increase the monetarization of farm
output
(iii) Increase the competitiveness of
cash crops
(iv) Promote income-generating
activities
- Rural roads
- Rural electrification

Selected Bank and Government
Performance Indicators

(i) Increase in coverage of DISS

(i) Continue implementation of the
National Plan of Good Govemance
(ii) Continue implementation of the
National Decentralization Policy;

LENDING
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY01)

LENDING
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY01)
- Rural Roads (FY03)

Objective 41Promote Good Governance
4.1 Democratic Govemance

Bank Group Instruments
and Timing

Activities of Other Donors

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)
Diag nosis and Development

Objectives of the PRSP

4.2 Local Governance

Cvenen'StagyAtos

Goverment's Strategy/Actions
(i) Provideadequate financing
provisionsto emerging communities;
(ii) Preparc regional representatives for
the management,supervision,and
leadershiproles conferred on them by
decentralization;

Selected Bank and Government

Performance Indicators

Share of budget effectively reaching
the most decentralized departments.
Annual survey of decentralized units on
the status of allotted budget execution

Bank Group Instruments

and Timing

LENDING
- Community-Based Rural
Development(FY01)

Atvte

fOhrDnr

Activities of Other Donors
Decentralization (Belgium; Canada;
Netherlands; Switzerland; European
Union; France

(iii) inmplementan efficient and
impartiallocal administration,
responsiveto the needs of the
population;

(iv) Make efforts to achieve citizen
participation through involving civil
society organizationsin all aspects of
local development (planning, decisionmaking,execution, and monitoring)
4Co

(v) Adopt an official text to solve any
anomaliesresulting from the
geographic re-mapping of
administrativeborders while
maintaining a sufficient degree of
decentralizationof servicesto make
interventionsmore effective, improve
citizens'access to public services, and
install genuine grass-rootsgovernment;
(vi) Adopt an official text allowing true
decentralization of managementof the
State's hunian, material, and financial
resources,by granting new powers to
officialsresponsible for operations

W

I-

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)
Diagnosis and Development
Objectives of the PRSP
4.3 Economic Govemance

Government's Strateg/Actions
(i) Strengtheningthe management and
monitoring mechanisms of public
finances
(ii) Carry out a review of public
expenditurein all sectors
(iii) Enact thebudget accountslaw (loi
de reglements)by the National
Assembly and create an independent
Audit Office

Seletrmank andiaorn
Performance Indicators
Half-yeazlyopinion polls:
- of users of govemnmentservices
(Health education);
-of economic agents on
government tendors
(procurementprocedures,
settlementdelays)

(iv) Improvecoordination of aid and
focus on harmonization.

Gap between unit prices of a certin
number of products obtainedby publc
bidding and those obtained by the
private sector

(v) Increase the national capacity to
elaborate strategies and prepare budget

Timely coVpletion and release of
budget execution reports

Bank Group L
and Timing

Activities of Other Donors

LENDING
- Competitiveness and Enterprise
Development (FY02)
- Public Sector Managenent (FY03)
NON-LENDING
- Public service quality assessment
(FY01)

estimates

(vi) Promotesuch valuesas
meticulousness,integrity, and
transparencyin public affairs and among
businessmen.
(vii) Intensifythe struggleagainst
practices at odds with the public interest,
especiatlycorruption,nepotism, and
patronage
(viii) Setup a national anti-corruption
network for comments and proposed
solutions

X

Annex

B2

CAS Annex B2 - BurkinaFaso

SelectedIndicators*of BankPortfolioPerformance
and Management
As Of Date 11/0312000

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa
Average ImplementationPeriod(years)b
Percent of ProblemProjects by Number a, c
Percent of ProblemProjects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projectsat Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projectsat Risk by Amount a, d
DisbursementRatio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR duringthe year (yes/no)
SupervisionResources(total US$)
Average Supervision(US$/project)

MemorandumItem
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

1998

1999

2000

2001

12
4.4
25
19.7
25
19.7
19.8

11
4.5
27.3
22.2
36.4
35.3
21

7
4.1
14.3
2.8
14.3
2.8
28.7

7
4.4
14.3
2.8
14.3
2.8
9.2

YES
$2,189
$156

NO
$1,466
$104

YES
$880
$97

NO
$981
$81

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
35
7
557.5
150.5
31.4
14.3
23.4
2.7

As shown in the Annual Reporton Portfolio Perfommance
(exceptfor current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's countryportfolio.
Percentof projects rated U or HU on developmentobjectives (DO) and/orimplementationprogress(IP).
As defined under the Portfolio ImprovementProgram.
Ratio of disbursementsduringthe year to the undisbursedbalanceof the Bank'sportfolio at the
beginningof the year: Investmentprojectsonly.
All indicatorsare for projects active in the Portfolio,withthe exceptionof DisbursementRatio,
which includes all active projectsas well as projectswhich exited duringthe fiscal year.

50

Annex
CAS Annex B3- Bank Group Program Summary

B3

Burkina Faso

As Of Data 1110112000

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

2001

COMMUNITY-BASEDRURAL DEVELOPMENT

67.0

HIVIAIDS Disaster ResponseProject

20.0

OUAGADOUGOUWATERSUPPLYPROJECT

70.0

PRSC (1)

60.0

Sub-Total

217.0

BASIC EDUC SECTOR

2002

2003

Implementation
Risksb

StrategicRewardsb

H
H
H
H

H

30.0

H

COMPETITIVENESS& ENTERPRISEDEVELOPM 25.0

H
H
H

M
M
M
L

H
H
H

M
L
L

ENERGY

20.0

URBAN ENVIRONMENTSUPPLEMENTAL

20.0

Sub-Total

95.0

PUBLIC SECTORMANAGEMENT

10.0

RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE

40.0

PRSC (2)

60.0

Sub-Total

110.0

TOTAL

422.0

H
L
L

a. This table presents the proposed programfor the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicatewhether the strategic rewardsand implementationrisks are expected to be high (H), moderate(M),
or low (L).
Template createdon 11/3/00.

51

Annex B3

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001
1998

IFC approvals(US$m)

1999 2000 2001

0.30 1.50

Sector (%)
FINANCIALSERVICES
MINING & METALS

100

Total

100 100

100

0

0

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
MIGA guarantees(US$m)

100

66
34

0

0

0.00 0.00

52

Annex B4

Burkina Faso

CASAnnex B4 - NonlendingServices
AsOf Date1110312000

Product

Compl. Cost
($'000)
FY

Audiencea

Objectiveb

this FY
Underway
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01

65
20
81
13
70
45
20
50
50
30

Bank
Bank,Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank
Bank, Gvt, donors
Bank
Bank, Gvt
Bank

KnowledgeGeneration
knowledgeGeneration
Problem-solving,KnowledgeGeneration
knowledgeGeneration
Problem-solving,KnowledgeGeneration
knowledgeGeneration
Problem-solving,KnowledgeGeneration
knowledgeGeneration
knowledgeGeneration
KnowledgeGeneration

CPPR
Client Feedback Survey
TA for PER 2/
Econ.Monitoring/Gen.EconWork 3/
Support for PRSP Monitoring
TA to INSD

FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02

50
20
115
80
50
20

Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt, donors
Bank, Gvt

Problem-solving,KnowledgeGeneration
Problem-solving
Problem-sharing,Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

CAS ProgressReport
TA to INSD
VocationalTraining Strategy
TA for PER 2/
Econ.Monitoring/Gen.EconWork 3/

FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

50
20
40
115
110

Bank
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt
Bank, Gvt

KnowledgeGeneration
KnowledgeGeneration
KnowledgeGeneration
Problem-solving,Knowledge Generation
KnowledgeGeneration

CAS 1/
Poverty Database
Public Service Quality Assessment
IDF Gender/Legal Reform
TA for PER 2/
HIPC Follow up
Support to EU Initiative
Econ.Monitoring/Gen.EconWork 3/
Support for PRSP Monitoring
Country Fin. Account. Assessment

Planned

a.
b.
1/
2/
3/

Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
Knowledgegeneration, public debate, problem-solving.
Total completion cost for CAS: $295k
Includes supportto National PER Committee,and dissemination
includesTA for capacity building and informal backgroundpolicy work

53

Annex

B5

Burkina Faso Social Indicators
Latestsingle year

Sameregionlincomegroup

1970-75

1980-85

1993-99

SubSaharan
Africa

6.2
1.9
6.3
7.0

79
2.5
11.4
7.5

11.6
2.8
17.5
6.8

627 3
2.2
33.3
5.4

3,5364
1.4
30.5
3.1

510
128

520
136

1.5
4.1

1.3
3.2

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Lowincome

POVERTY

(%of populabon)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

45.3

15.9
..

..

140

180
76
92

..

INCOME/CONSUMPTIONDISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate

0. 7
230
114
115
48.2
5.5
55.0

2.7
2.8

0.6

2.0
0.8

10
12
7

23
29
17

32
39
25

Total
Urban

.

78

Rural

.

35
50
26

38
2

58
53

80
82

.

68
70
33

41

45

54

50

63

137
278

117
242

105
210

92
151

68
92

526
407

467
362

547
484

432
383

235
208

(%of agegroup)
Total
Male
Female
Access to safe water

86
89
82

(% of populabion)
.

Immunization rate

(% under12months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutriton (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth

(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

54

Annex B6

Burkina Faso - Key EconomicIndicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Groasdomedicproducta
Agriculture
Industry

100

100

100
32

100

35

100
32

100

34

31

30

100
30

100
29

26

25

27

28

28

30

31

32

40

40

39

40

40

41

40

40

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investnent
Govemment investment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports(GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

91
23
10
14

91
26
12
15

89
28
14
13

87
30
14
16

90
28
16
12

88
29
14
14

87
28
14
14

87
27
13
14

13
28

11
29

11
28

14
31

13
29

11
28

11
26

11
25

Gross domestic avings
Gross national savingsc

9
18

9
17

11
17

13
20

10
15

12
18

13
19

13
19

2355

2536

2387

2599

2584

2685

2980

3245

220

240

230

230

230

250

250

260

Real annual growth rates (%/,calculated from 1985 prices)
4.0
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices
4.7
Gross Domestic Incomc

6.0
4.7

4.8
4.7

6.2
7.8

5.8
3.7

5.7
4.9

6.6
7.2

6.6
6.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%., calculated from 1985 prices)
3.1
1.1
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices
-0.4
0.2
Total consumption
-04
2.5
Private consumption

1.9
1.0
1.0

3.3
3.7
3.5

2.9
3.6
4.7

2.8
0.6
0.4

3.7
1.7
2.1

3.7
2.8
2.9

Services

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(USS million at current prices)
GNP per capita (USS, Atlas method)

Balance of Payments (USS millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Cufrent account balance
Netprivateforcigndirectinvestment
Long-tenn loans (nct)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change inreservesd
Memorandwn items
Resource balance (% of GDP)

306
237
666
485
-361
239
-31

276
233
724
562
-448
205
-91

267
229
661
511
-394
164
-104

364
325
803
639
-439
190
-117

292
255
760
600
-467
155
-135

292
253
745
595
-453
190
-101

340
296
783
625
-444
194
-90

368
322
819
653
-451
207
-82

20

16

11

-13

13

17

19

21

..

..

..

83

73

78

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

-143

4

35

33

15

-5

-27

-32

-15.3

-17.7

-16.5

-16.9

-18.1

-16.9

-14.9

-13.9
(Continued)

55

Annex B6
Burkina Faso - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
Currentexpenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth
total credit growth (%/o)
Real intaest rates
Consumerpriceindex (%change)
GDPdeflator(%change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

13.1
11.4
1.7
9.7

14.4
10.4
4.0
10.9

13.8
10.1
3.7
13.1

13.1
10.4
4.0
125

15.0
11.3
5.2
16.0

14.4
11.0
4.9
14.3

14.5
10.6
5.0
13.6

25.5
23.7
-97.6

25.0
8.2
74.0

26.7
14.2
64.8

24.8
1.7
87.4

25.3
6.5
37.1

24.9
6.3
58.7

82.6

83.1

7.8
9.8

6.1
4.2

-0.1
2.2

1.0
3.1

-1.1
-1.4

1.5
1.3

2.0
2.1

2.0
2.3

GDP atfactor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods sad nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of 1vi resources.
Consolidated central govermnment
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increasc in USS/LCU denotes appreciation.

56

14.8
10.5
5.3
12.8

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Burkina Faso - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

1995

Actual
1996
1997

Estimate
1999
2000

1998

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

1267

1294

1297

1358

1452

Net disbursements(US$m)f

124

81

69

63

126

48

49

50

54

296.6
53.8
11.3
78.9

312.5
51.0
11.7
83.9

476.9
53.4
18.7
83.0

0.0
77.0

0.0
84.6

0.0
0

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)'

Projected
2001
2002

2003

1533

1533

1533

61

74

74

74

373.0
52.2
14.9
83.6

497.0
56.2
20.9
82.2

524.7
57.1
25.2

451.5
51.4
21.7

417.0
47.2
20.0

0.0
82.0

0.0
84.0

0.0
79.7

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

..

..

..

..

..

608

636

690

710

..

Debt and debt service indicators
(%/6)

TDOIXGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionallTDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferredcreditor DS/public
DS

..

(%)

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio

(e)

IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equityand quasi-equity kc
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteeddebt, privatenonguaranteed,use of 1MF
credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, includingworkers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defmed as IBRD,IDA, the regional multilateraldevelopmentbanks, the IM, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes presentvalue of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equitytypes of both loan and equity instruments.

57

CA*Amxmm.

_BrinaFr.

~OeW
Oparallma(Operalanas
Paddisa)

Blain of Blank

AmOgOshitriMSIS

OmWdPro* 44

LanRLl,.
Supurviasin Ratngbi
PrajactID

Project "ame

P000296
P000287
P000283
P0003D8
P000304
P05088S
P000297

A SERVICES
I
HEALTHNUTRTION
8NMNW
CAPACITYBULL
POPULATKIOtAJDS
CONT
POST4PRIMARY
EDUC.
PRIVATEIRRIGATION
URN ENV

oleofiln

ab-y

s
a
S
S
S
U
S

IMI*t*

S
S
S
S
U
S

Fisca Year

5

9

4,J5151

IDA

196
1994
1997
1994
1997
1999
1995

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

41.3
29.2
21.4
26.3
26
5.2
37

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

SubTlht

0

1186.4

0

4743,4g

0.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~U

a Inlandeddlsbtunmsns to daten*Ns actualdisab[nmre s lo dala

p4rct*d ataUMlhal.

ss",a

ORD

L*WCrsdib Saunuy b UISD

UaiW.i

pecind andDda
WubuswAinfmd

OdtdniaAriiouna InUrnSnih
OtANT

Cacalle.

.

.^itQ
-bdab.

OrI* Frim Itmed

0
0
0
0
0
0
0f

28.7
4.5
15.6
4.8
ISA
3.8
12.7

14.5
4.8
7.4
5.4
9.3
1.1
12.2

8.6
2.4
0
0
0
0
12.2

0

66.1

54.

23.2

Annex B8

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Burkina Faso
BurkinaFaso
Statementof IFC's
Held and DisbursedPortfolio
As of 8131/00
(In US DollarsMillions)
Held

Disbursed

FY Approval Company
Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
1999 AEFFasoMine
1
0.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 0.25
0
0
0 0.25
0
0
1997 Ecobank-Burkina
0
0
0 0.38
0
0
1998 SGBB
0 0.38
Total Portfolio:

1

1.03

0

0

ApprovalsPendingCommitment
Loan Equity Quasi Partic

59

0

0.63

0

0

I

MAP SECTION

BURKINAFASO

M A L I
'

'

NATIONAL CAPITAL
CAPITALED'ETAT

_

_

-14'
50

0
14'

150

100

*

I

.---

D

\°

SOEJROU

C-

?--~

0

S

M A L I

X

~

T-

0

1

-2

y

~~~--

m

U

I

Bcbo : O
/

'C

KENEDOUGOU)

I

j

~

\.

f

-'

O

~~BOULKIEMWE
'
r 1JKADIOM
OOU~

E12'
BAEGA

,

-loulDe
ZIR

-f

~~~~~~~~~~~~TUYod
~~~~~~~~~~

\

0e

E

--

.0

'¢-~~

PONI

>'-t

.0

'

wNHUI

>

\-

R>
MA

6Fd-N'oSO

KOPOG
&GANZOURGOUf/UR

r

'0

H;t

OULGOU

~

\

o

DiapaB

0

~

0~~~~~~~~P r

NOUMB/

r

\'

->
"t9

,,

KMPEG

,'KUPEO

N I1

VE

Goou

M

Thi

,,,.,,

05

n

~~~~~~~~~

**

_.
,

p

DeisUni

on the part of
this .nap do n,otimnply,
TheWorld BookGroap,any j.dg,reW

H NA N A
G~~OT

D 'IVO RE

i i
odoc.d by the
TheWorldBn
-onoin,clors
denominaions
anyother informtionshownon

s nap

I~~~~~~~~~~~~The
~~~~~~~~~~~~~.d

B

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

4

AO°iwo\

j

-0

'-I

COTE

%I..

(

adorNGou1O

.

f

/~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~J

>

-<

-NIn~

,-

,

N

0 f"r

10'

L0

SS

0 Dioulsso

_

,

0-; t/

\

0

.

K

-

)

Zorgho
%

L

r

LES BALE

NIGER

GorO4 bi

KOMONDJAR1

Q

M%

-og

Sjj

B

5|.-s

"»

.
GNAGNA

<osoulso'5--

-O

>-",OUOAG)k~06uU

N PNGUIEUWt
Rth
-~,

,

YAGHA

i>

\,,f

H

Y,j

GoquM'
I

G

?-

__S/}9

IJ

MH
JWA;>
BAN
j gBANWA
ru
1 g*
r$
HOUE

12'

(

(SANMATENGA
oK'O

-

.\

-

<

4

/

AYAA

f-t

GOJ'f

N

f

,^

z

PASSORE

.KOSS

~*

(5 4

S

,L

ArLANucOCrEAN

7-

:9

h

'1 j

'GH

(

,

0

--

(LERAOA

0

YATEN GA'9

t,

DIVoOI
COTER

I

OqU1SENO

(

j

~~~~~~~01

~

0Dori

200

/ KILOMETRES
KILOMETERS

r--E-

-ERIA)
,-''

~~~~~~~

________________

GUINEA

G(-'A-

.-

LIMITESDESPROVINCES
BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONALES
FRONTIERES

FASdoo;,JI

BU

',,oRKINA

)'
?

OUDALAN
BOUNDARIES

IGR

INA

,

RIVIERES
- -PROVINCE
_

(

AA

L

RIVERS
-

.4

A_ t

TO GO
-

o.

Th

F,

th. legal taIs of any t-ritry, or
'ion
or -rept.-nco of
\ osy
y endorsement
0

ho°ndri

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2'2'

Os

-

