Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank Group
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No.

21187-JM

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

JAMAICA

November 2, 2000

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distributionand may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
officialduties. Its contents may not otherwisebe disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

CurrencyUnit:JamaicanDollar(J$)
US$1.0= J$44.00(asof October30, 2000)
FISCAL YEAR

April I to March31
WEIGHTSANDMEASURES
Kilogram,MetricSystem
ABBREVIATIONSAND ACRONYMS

AAA
BOJ
BRDP

AnalyticalandAdvisoryActivities
Bankof Jamaica
BankRestructuringandDebtManagement
Program
CAN
CountryAssistanceNote
CAS
CountryAssistanceStrategy
CDB
CaribbeanDevelopmentBank
CFAA CountryFinancialAccountability
Assessment
CIDA CanadianInternationalDevelopment
Agency
CPAR CountryProcurementAssessmentReview
CPI
ConsumerPriceIndex
CPPR CountryPortfolioPerformanceReview
DFID
Departmentfor InternationalDevelopment
(UK)
DevelopmentObjective
DO
EIB
EuropeanInvestmentBank
ESW
Economicand SectorWork
EU
EuropeanUnion
FINSAC FinancialSectorAdjustmentCompany
FTZ
Free TradeZone
GDP
GrossDomesticProduct
GEF
GlobalEnvironmentalFacility
GTZ
GermanAgencyfor TechnicalCooperation
HRU
HealthReformUnit
IBRD
InternationalBank forReconstruction
and
Development
IDB
Inter-American
DevelopmentBank
IDF
InstitutionalDevelopmentFund
IFC
InternationalFinanceCorporation
IFI
InternationalFinancialInstitution
IMF
InternationalMonetaryFund
Implementation
Progress
IP
NGO
Non-Governmental
Organization
JANEAP JamaicaNationalEnvironmentalAction
Plan

Vice President
Director
Lead Economist
Task Team

JBIC
JICA
JSLC
JSIF
KFED
LAC
LIL
MEFP

JapanBankforInternationalCooperation
JapanInternationalCooperationAgency
JamaicaSurveyof LivingConditions
JamaicaSocialInvestmentFund
KuwaitFund forEconomicDevelopment
LatinAmericaandthe Caribbean
LearningandInnovationLoan
Memorandumof EconomicandFinancial
Policies
MIF
MultilateralInvestmentFund
MIGA MultilateralInvestmentGuaranteeAgency
MOH
Ministryof Health
MOP
Memorandumof the President
MTS
MediumTermStrategy
NAFTA NorthAmericanFree TradeAgreement
NCB
NationalCommercialBank
Governmentof the Netherlands
NET
NWC
NationalWaterCommission
OED
OperationsEvaluationDepartment
PAHO Pan-AmericanHealthOrganization
Publicand Publicly-Guaranteed
PPG
REER RealEffectiveExchangeRate
ROSE Reformof SecondaryEducation
SIDA
SwedishInternationalDevelopment
CooperationAgency
SIL
SectorInvestmentLoan
Staff-Monitored
Program
SMP
STATIN StatisticalInstituteof Jamaica
UBJ
UnionBankof Jamaica
UNDP UnitedNationsDevelopmentProgram
UNICEF UnitedNationsChildren'sFund
USAID UnitedStatesAgencyforInternational
Development
USDA U.S. Departmentof Agriculture

David de Ferranti
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos
Ali Khadr
Sanjay Kathuria (Task Team Leader), Philippe Auffret (Task Team Leader during tde
initial preparation stage), Homa Z. Fotouhi, Errol Graham, Raj Nallari Claudio Visconti

The team acknowledges the contribution of several colleagues in the LAC region, as well as Kalim M. Shah
(IFC) and Pierre Nadji (MIGA).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JAMAICA
COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .........................

I.

POLITICAL,ECONOMIC,ANDSOCIALCONTEXT
A.
B.
C.

II.

III.

IV.

V.

i-iv

Political and Governance Context
Economic Context ......................
Poverty and Social Issues....................

.

.2

.2
2
4

MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS
...
A. The 1996/97 Financial Sector Intervention and its Aftermath .............................................
.7
B.
Recent Developments: Enhanced Policy Commitment
..............................................
C. Economic Outlook...............................................
D. Risks ...............................................
FRAMEWORK FOR POVERTY REDUCTION AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
A. Restoring Economic Growth...........................................................
B. Protecting the Poor and Ensuring Inclusion.14
C. Improving Governance, Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Public Sector .16
D. Ensuring Sustainable Development.17
WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR FYO1-02
...
A. Bank Assistance in a Historical Context
..
B. Bank Assistance in the Context of Overall Support for Jamaica's Development Agenda.
C. Proposed World Bank Assistance Program for FY01-02
.
.22
D. Country Program Monitoring.........................................................
E.
Bank Exposure, Financial Management and Procurement, and Managing Risks.27
CONCLUDING REMARKS

BOXES
Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4
Box 5

..

Measuring, Analyzing, and Explaining Poverty in Jamaica
.5
Why do High Investment Rates not Lead to Growth? The Investment Puzzle
OED's Country Assistance Note .19
CAS Consultations- an Evolving Process .20
Pro-active Efforts Turn Around the Portfolio of IBRD Projects.22

7
9
10
11
...

i2

12

18
19
20
26

30

.8

TEXT TABLES
Table 1
Selected Economic Indicators
.4
Table 2
Basic Gender Indicators
.6
Table 3
Outlook for Selected Economic Indicators under the Authorities' Program .11
Table 4
Jamaica's Development Partners and their Major Areas of Activity ......................................... 21
Table 5
Bank Assistance Scenarios, FY01-02 .25
Table 6
Proposed CAS Benchmarks, 1999-2002.26
Table 7
External Public and Publicly-Guaranteed Debt and Bank Exposure Indicators .28
CHARTS
Chart 1
Historical Economic Indicators
.3
Chart 2
Four Elements of a Sustainable Poverty Reduction Strategy.13

This documenthas a restricted distribution and may be used by recipientsonly in the
performanceof their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

ANNEXES
Annex A
Annex B I
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8
Annex B9
Annex C
Annex D
Annex E

Jamaica at a Glance
Country Program Matrix
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators - Base Case Scenario
Key Exposure Indicators - Base Case Scenario
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Outlook for Selected Economic Indicators under an Alternative Medium-Term
Macroeconomic Scenario
Sustainable Public Debt Dynamics
CAS Consultations

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Developments since the last CAS. The period since the last CAS for Jamaica was discussed at the
i)
Board in March 1993 has been very challenging. Since then; the Jamaican economy has experienced low or
negative growth, particularly following a financial sector crisis that developed around 1996, when several
domestic financial institutions and insurance companies ran into severe liquidity and solvency problems.
The Government undertook wide-ranging intervention, which succeeded in averting a run on and collapse of
the financial system but led to rapid accumulation of high-cost domestic debt. By end-March 2000, gross
public sector liabilities related to the interventions (including those held by public sector entities) amounted
to about 37 percent of GDP. Total public sector debt (excluding intra-public sector debt) stood at
131 percent of GDP. The intervention has imposed severe costs on the economy, such as high interest rates,
crowding out of investment, reduction in competitiveness, and a vitiation of financial sector intermediation,
which in turn have resulted in a lack of growth over the last four years. In terms of Bank assistance to
Jamaica, no new lending proposals were presented to the Board after September 1996, owing mainly to
implementation difficulties in several on-going projects as well as the absence of a shared vision on a
financial sector resolution strategy. As discussed below, these issues have now been resolved.
Encouraging Recent Initiatives. To address these problems, the Government undertook strong
ii)
corrective steps, foremost being fiscal tightening and initiating the implementation of a strategy to address
remaining financial sector problems and tackle the mounting public debt burden. It also requested a StaffMonitored Program (SMP) with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) covering the two Jamaican fiscal
years April 2000 - March 2002, which was finalized in July 2000. The economic situation, while still
demanding close monitoring, has improved in comparison with 2-3 years ago. Moreover, on-track
implementation of the SMP would help to reverse the adverse public debt dynamics and contribute to
restoration of growth.
Considerable Challenges Ahead. Positive recent developments notwithstanding, Jamaica faces
iii)
considerable challenges ahead. The immediate challenge is to prevent a reversal of the significant declines in
measured poverty witnessed in the 1990s, which occurred despite low or negative growth. While there is
insufficient understanding of the factors explaining the recent declines in poverty, there is little doubt that
these declines are not sustainable unless growth recovers. Thus, the priority task is to lay the foundations for
a restoration of growth. In terms of social dimensions, Jamaica needs to address major concerns relating to
the vulnerability of its youth as well as to crime and violence, which have a negative impact on investment
and tourism, and affect the poor disproportionately.
The Four-Pillar Development Strategy. The Government's development strategy lays out the
iv)
agenda for tackling both immediate and longer-term challenges. There is broad consensus among the
Government, civil society, and the country's bilateral and multilateral development partners on this
development agenda. Detailed in the Government's Medium-Term Strategy paper, it rests on four pillars: (i)
restoring economic growth; (ii) ensuring that growth is inclusive and that the poor are adequately protected;
(iii) improving governance, efficiency and effectiveness in the public sector; and (iv) ensuring sustainable
development.
The Bank's CAS. Based on the Government's development agenda, and given the context of the
v)
fiscal and financial sector challenges, an improved macroeconomic dialogue, the promising initiatives over
the last few months, and the improvement in the quality of the Bank's portfolio, the Bank plans to initiate a
fresh assistance program. The proposed program has been drawn up in close collaboration with the
Government, and with the benefit of consultations with civil society and major development partners.
Covering the Bank's fiscal years 2001-2002, its immediate aim is to help prevent a reversal of the recent
(unexplained) gains in poverty reduction and create the foundations for sustained growth. The CAS lays out
a highly focused program, based on three principles: (i) a focus on the Bank's core mandate of poverty
reduction; (ii) a focus on areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage; and (iii) a focus on
complementarity with other development partners, relying largely on their intervention in many critical areas
such as agriculture and rural development, as well as law and order and the justice system, and coordinating
closely to ensure efficient division of labor in common areas of intervention such as the financial sector.

ii
vi)
The Bank's Base-Case Assistance Program. Assuming that the macroeconomic and financial
sector restructuring program remains on track, and that Bank portfolio implementation remains satisfactory,
the Bank plans an FY01-02 assistance program to Jamaica that includes US$220 million in new lending,
consisting of:
* US$150 million in fast-disbursing support for a bank restructuring and debt management program
(BRDP), comprising two US$75 million operations (the first of which is presented alongside this CAS, with
the second expected in FY02), to support financial sector restructuring and help reduce the public debt
burden, thereby paving the way for restoration of growth and employment opportunities for the poor. A
similar, US$150 million program has been recently approved by the Inter-American Development Bank, as
well as US$25 million by the Caribbean Development Bank.
* US$70 million in support for a social sector program focused on strengthening social safety net
mechanisms (US$35 million) and secondary education (US$35 million), to be delivered in the form of two
investment operations (one each in FY01 and FY02). Strengthening safety net mechanisms will help provide
better and more cost-effective social assistance for the poor, even as improving access to, and the quality of,
secondary education will address the key problem of youth at risk.
* Analytical and advisory activities (AAA), focusing on two broad areas. The first, work on which would
be initiated in the second half of FY01, concerns economic growth, with special attention to the analysis of
the main sources of growth, including the (in)efficiency of investment and estimation of the informal and/or
underground economy, productivity and competitiveness issues, and structural constraints to growth (in
particular, labor market and wage-setting issues). The second area, on which work would be initiated in
FY02, concerns poverty and related social ills, with special attention to an understanding of recent poverty
trends and linkages with growth and, more broadly, to the causes and consequences of poverty and social
exclusion. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a Country Procurement Assessment
Review (CPAR) have recently been completed in draft form and will shortly be discussed with the
authorities in order to inform on-going Bank project support for public sector reform.
vii)
Apart from the above, the Bank will continue with its regional initiatives, from which Jamaica would
also benefit. These include a prospective US$85-100 million loan/credit package for HIV/AIDS programs in
the Caribbean region; the biennial CGCED conference, which is organized by the Bank in collaboration with
Governments and development partners involved in the Caribbean; and the initiation of project preparation,
funded by the Global Environmental Facility, on a possible environmental protection project. In addition,
within the Bank Group, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA), though faced with only modest prospects of activity in Jamaica in the near term,
stand ready to assess concrete opportunities as they arise.
viii)
The Low-Case Assistance Program. If the macroeconomic framework (including policy effort) is
judged by the Bank-in close consultation with IMF staff-to be unsatisfactory, or if there is insufficient
progress in the financial sector restructuring program, a low-case lending program would be triggered.
Under this scenario, the second phase of the BRDP would not be processed, and the education reform project
would be delayed, so that new commitments in FYO1-02 would be capped at US$110 million. At the same
time, Bank efforts would be shifted from-lending preparation to an acceleration of AAA, focusing on poverty
monitoring and sources of growth.
ix)
Managing Risks. Jamaica is a politically open and stable democracy. The incumbent Government
was elected by a large majority in 1989, 1993, and 1997, and has broad political support across the country
and at the local level to undertake far-reaching economic reforms. Unfortunately, the last five years have
been among the most challenging in independent Jamaica, and the risk of adverse developments under which
the macroeconomic context for the proposed Bank assistance program comes under threat (with deteriorating
debt-to-GDP ratios and negative growth) is significant. Some of the key risks and the strategies for
addressing them are highlighted below:
* External Risk Factors include possible adverse commodity price movements, such as decline in the
price of alumina (a major Jamaican export, along with bauxite) and/or further oil price increases, which
would increase the current account deficit. Although these could likely be weathered, a compounding of

iii
shocks cannot be ruled out (and their impact could be aggravated by the net erosion in competitiveness over
the past few years)-for example, an increase in the current account deficit combined with a decline in
foreign direct investment, a significant source of financing. Steps are being taken to increase Jamaica's
resilience to such shocks, for example by ensuring further reserve build-up under the SMP. If, in spite of
this, the macroeconomic situation were to deteriorate significantly, the Bank would need to work with the
authorities and the IMF to strengthen the macroeconomic framework, while ensuring that measures were
being taken to protect the poor. In such a context, the authorities would likely have little option but to seek
enhanced support from the International Financial Institutions (IFIs).
* Risks of Weak Domestic Response. Despite the Government's policies to improve private incentives for
investment, recovery in the domestic economy could be held back by a slower-than-expected decline in
domestic interest rates, a weak private sector supply response, and austerity-driven labor action or social
unrest. Such risks, and their potentially adverse consequences for the poor, would be mitigated by the Bankassisted strengthening of the safety net program, and through efforts to gain a better understanding of the
determinants of and structural constraints to growth, as well as of the links between growth and poverty, and
to work the public policy implications into the dialogue with Government. Were unfavorable developments
to materialize, the Bank would work closely with the Government as well as the IMF and other development
partners to track and alleviate repercussions on the poor and vulnerable and to appropriately strengthen the
policy stance.
* Policy Risk Factors include, most importantly, the risk of delays or setbacks in the implementation of
the authorities' program arising, for example, as a result of domestic consensus-building difficulties or
shortcomings in implementation capacity. At least three ways of mitigating such risks would be pursued.
First, while it is difficult to predict policy reversal, the Bank will continue to engage in close dialogue with
both the Government and civil society to reduce the chances of this happening, and encourage public
announcements and debate on government reform intentions. Second, given the lessons of the past, the
planned configuration of Bank lending-based on up-front and irreversible reform measures that are
domestically "owned"-would help mitigate risks. In particular, this approach would be followed in the
proposed Bank support for the bank restructuring and debt management program, which would take the form
of two discrete, phased operations. Third, in the unlikely event that reversal should occur, the Bank would
continue to engage in dialogue and to encourage debate, while deferring or discontinuing new lending as
appropriate.
x)
Risk mitigation efforts notwithstanding, it is clear that the success of Jamaica's program cannot be
guaranteed. The Bank needs to weigh the reputational risk to which it will be subject if its technical and
financial support for Jamaica is associated with disappointing results against the potential costs to the country
of inadequate support (and the different type of reputational risk associated therewith). This CAS, while
cognizant of both, makes the case for resuming strong support. It recognizes that Jamaica has had a long
period of financial sector difficulties and economic recession. Serious social problems have taken root. To
combat these, the Government has shown resolve in maintaining a very tight and potentially unpopular fiscal
stance, and in defining a program for the resolution of financial sector problems. Under these circumstances,
this CAS seeks to respond to the encouraging reform steps already taken. It also maintains a shorter-thanusual two-year horizon, intended to enable a broadening and deepening of in-country consultations over the
next 18 months, as well as to continue studying the priority issues identified and analyzing the evolving
situation in order to best respond to Jamaica's needs. Delay may be costly for Jamaica, and there is the real
risk that the socio-economic situation could get worse unless the Bank and other IFIs are able to extend
timely assistance to the country. The Bank will work closely with other bilateral and multilateral agencies in
ensuring that complementarity in activities is maintained and strengthened, and that the development impact
of combined efforts is maximized.
xi)
Issues Suggested for Board Discussion. The following issues are suggested for discussion by the
Executive Directors.
* Opportunities and Risks. Does the CAS strike an adequate balance between the costs of not supporting
Jamaica and the significant risks involved?

iv
* Lending Focus. Is the balance in lending between the financial sector (US$150 million) and the social
sectors (US$70 million) appropriate?
* Low-Case Lending Scenario. Are the proposed low-case scenario (volume, composition) and associated
triggers appropriate? In particular, does the low-case scenario "penalize" the social sectors for policy-related
shortfalls outside these sectors?
* Analytical and Advisory Activities. Are the proposed non-lending services focusing on the right areas
(e.g., poverty, growth and competitiveness)?
* Perfornance Indicators. Are the country development indicators appropriate, given the two-year focus
of this CAS?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR JAMAICA
1.
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) has been preparedon the basis of encouragingrecent
initiativesby the Jamaicanauthorities,includingthe resumptionof an intensivepolicy dialoguewith the
Bank and other multilateralagencies. The Governmenthas strengthenedits macroeconomicand structural
policy stance,notably through fiscal tighteningand by devisinga strategyto address remainingfinancial
sector problemsand tacklethe mountingpublic debt burden. It also requesteda Staff-MonitoredProgram
(SMP) with the InternationalMonetaryFund (IMF) coveringthe two Jamaicanfiscal years April2000 March 2002, which was finalized in July 2000. Together with major progress in Bank portfolio
implementation,these developmentshave paved the way for renewedlending by the Bank. While the
authorities'programfacessignificantrisks,the potentialcoststo Jamaicaof withholdingBank supportat this
juncture are very high. Within the Bank Group, the InternationalFinance Corporation(IFC) and the
MultilateralInvestmentGuaranteeAgency(MIGA),though faced with only modestprospectsof activity in
Jamaicain the nearterm, standreadyto assess concreteopportunitiesas they arise.
2.
Theperiodsincethe last CAS for Janaica was discussedat the Board on March 25, 1993(document
R1993-41)has beenvery challenging.The Jamaicaneconomyexperiencedlow or negativegrowthfor much
of the period, particularlyfollowing a financial sector crisis that developedaround 1996, when several
domestic financialinstitutionsand insurancecompaniesran into severe liquidityand solvencyproblems.
The Governmentundertookwide-rangingintervention,which succeededin avertinga run on and collapseof
the financialsystem but led to rapid accumulationof high-costdomesticdebt. By end-March2000, gross
public sectorliabilitiesrelatedto the interventionsamountedto about37 percentof GDP. In terms of Bank
assistanceto Jamaica,no new lendingproposalswere presentedto the Board after September1996,owing
mainlyto implementationdifficultiesin severalon-goingprojectsas well as the absenceof a sharedvision
on a fmancialsectorresolutionstrategy. As discussedbelow,these issues have now been resolved. In all,
Bank commitmentssince early 1993 have amounted to US$253million under 8 operations. MIGA has
issued 14 contractsof guaranteefor a total of US$151 millionsince 1992,while IFC has undertakenthree
projectsfor a total of US$80million(includinga "B" loan).
3.
This CAS, which covers Bank fiscal years 2001-2002,proposesa Bank assistanceprogramwhose
immediateaim is to help preventa reversalof the recent gains in povertyreduction(which, as explainedin
Box 1 below, remain insufficientlyunderstood)and createthe foundationsfor sustainedgrowth. Proposed
Bank assistancehas three main components. The first is US$150 million in fast-disbursinglendingfor a
bank restructuringand debt managementprogram(the first phase of which is presented along with this
CAS), to supportfinancialsector restructuringand help reduce the public debt burden, thereby pavingthe
way for restoration of growth and employmentopportunitiesfor the poor. A similar US$150 million
programhas recentlybeen approvedby the Inter-AmericanDevelopmentBank, as well as US$25 millionby
the CaribbeanDevelopmentBank. The second componentis US$70million in support of a social sector
programfocusedon strengtheningsocialsafetynet mechanismsand secondaryeducation,to be deliveredin
the form of two investmentoperations(one each in FY01 and FY02). Strengtheningsafetynet mechanisms
will help providebetter and more cost-effectivesocial assistancefor the extremepoor, even as improving
accessto, and the qualityof, secondaryeducationwill help to tacklethe key problemof youth at risk. The
third componentis analyticaland advisoryactivities(AAA),focusingon addressinggaps in understanding
relatingto poverty,growthand competitiveness.The shorter-than-usualtwo-yearcoverageof this CAS is
intendedto enablea broadeningand deepeningof in-countryconsultations-satisfactorilyinitiatedunderthis
CAS-over thenext 18 months,as well as furtherstudyand analysisof the evolvingsituationand Jamaica's
needs, in orderto maximizeeffectivenessof futureBank assistance.

2

I. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONTEXT
A. Politicaland GovernanceContext
4.
Jamaica has been a stable democracy since independence in 1962. Two-party competition has
become institutionalized, with the People's National Party (PNP) and the opposition Jamaica Labor Party
(JLP) alternating in power roughly once every ten years over the past three decades. The PNP has been in
government since the 1989 elections, from 1992 under the leadership of Prime Minister P. J. Patterson.
Parliamentary elections-which returned the PNP to power-were last held in December 1997. Under the
Constitution, elections are called by the Government and must be held within three months of the dissolution
of Parliament, which has a life-span of five years.
5.
On governance more broadly, Jamaica appears to fare comparatively well overall, although problems
persist in key dimensions. Aspects of (perceived) comparative strength-relative to other LAC and
developing countries-include
well-established formal traditions of democratic participation and
accountability. Jamaica also scores comparatively well in cross-country surveys of perceptions of
corruption. Political participation is broadly exercised, as exemplified in high, if declining, voter turnout
(around two-thirds) at elections. Jamaican civil society includes a free and active media, and a rich, often
vocal array of civic, professional and labor groups and other non-governmental organizations. Information
about key policy issues typically circulates freely and is widely debated, as evidenced recently in the public
commentary on the Government's Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) for the SMP.
On public sector management issues, while the need for strengthening remains, there is a foundation of
transparency and accountability in public financial management systems, as well as of meritocracy in public
sector recruitment, and progress has been made in improving procurement systems. Nevertheless, even as
most of these dimensions of governance continue to fare relatively well in comparative terms, many are
under strain. Constraints, actual or perceived, on the exercise of voice and participation through traditional
democratic channels have fostered development of alternative channels (such as the "road block"), often
compounding the challenge of building and maintaining social consensus and cohesion on key political,
economic and social issues.
6.
Perhaps the paramount governance-related challenge facing Jamaica pertains to the crime and
violence and law and order dimensions. While the overall crime rate has been on the decline for at least a
decade, the incidence of reported violent crime, although declining since 1997, remains among the highest in
the hemisphere. Violent crime, which is concentrated in inner-city areas and among young males as victims
and perpetrators, has its roots both in "push" factors (linked to social exclusion) and in "pull" factors
(originally rooted in party-political affiliations and rivalries, and more recently associated with the
proliferation of illegal, including drug-related, opportunities and status associated therewith). Reducing
violent crime and, more generally, better enforcement of law and order is of the utmost priority for Jamaica
in view of the highly disruptive impact that these phenomena have had on key determinants of economic
performance-including human capital development, investor confidence, tourism development, and the
country's image abroad.
B. Economic Context
7.
With per capita GDP growth being negative for most of the last 25 years, average incomes in
Jamaica have not improved for the last three decades. This has occurred despite very high investment to
GDP ratios of around 30 percent (implying very inefficient investment), aided by active development partner
engagement. This is in sharp contrast to the faster-growing developing countries, where high investment
ratios have been accompanied by consistent improvements in productivity and growth. Higher GDP growth
in Jamaica is unlikely to occur without substantial improvements in productivity.

3
8.
The initial reform period (1980-86):
Halting reform, accumulation of external debt
(see Chart 1 and Table 1). Jamaica's economic
reform efforts date back to the election in 1980
of a Government that supported free markets and
private-sector-led growth, backed by a record
level of disbursements from international

C

Chart 1. Historcal Economic Indicators
Output andInflation
12

I

financial institutions (IFIs), including three
World Bank Structural Adjustment Loans during
1981-85. By 1986, progress had been made in
correcting an overvalued exchange rate and to
some extent in reducing the size of the public
sector.
However, bountiful availability of
external financing encouraged a delay in many
areas of reform and created a pile-up of external
debt. Growth was sporadic during this period.
9.
More broad-based reforms, reflected in
improved growth (1986-94). Reforms made
more progress during 1986-94, notably in the
areas of trade and exchange liberalization (the
capital account has been open since 1991);
privatization; reduction of public sector
employment; removal of price controls and
subsidies; reform of the tax system; and
liberalization of the financial system involving

so

8

/

DU

H*

X

-

20

l

III

0

IGDPOeftaxis)_CPI
ExternalCABandIndebtedness
160

2

140

0

120

-2

100

2

-4

I

80

-6

60

-8

40

-10
-12

20

1o90

the privatizationof banks. These reforms were
reflected in at least some aspects of economic
performance. There was a sharp improvement
in Jamaica's fiscal situation (the central
government moved to fiscal surplus in 1990,
compared with large deficits in the 1980s, and
the public debt to GDP ratio moved sharply
downwards), its external position (net
international reserves turned positive after 1993,

l

D1nf

ol

6

l*.6

n

4I

1
I

;982 ;196,

F

-

;988 ;990 ;992 1994 1996 1998

PG(leflxis) +Ext.CAB

Central Gov't Overali Balance and Total Debt
7

200

1o0
2

n

160

/

-3

t

140

8

120

and debt startedto come down), and inflation,

-8

100

which declined from very high levels in the
early 1990s. Also, seen in the context of
independent Jamaica's history, the 3.4 percent
average annual growth registered over the period
1986-94 was very good; however, it trended
down in the 1990s and turned negative in
1996/97.

-13u

80

-18

.

9821M

r-

1984

1986

19

990 19921

OveallBalance(leftaxis)

.

.

.

.

.60

1996 1998

-4-PublicDebt

10.
Incipient problems looming, especially in thefinancial sector (1995). These reforms, however, were
incomplete. Emerging problems included structural increases in wages unrelated to productivity, and, more
importantly, financial sector liberalization unaccompanied by a sufficiently robust prudential and supervisory
infrastructure. This liberalization led to a proliferation of inter-linked financial institutions, most of which
had weak management and which, moreover, sought to benefit from regulatory arbitrage. There was a credit
boom over the period 1990-95, even as much of the real sector was reacting passively to, and thus being
adversely affected by, the trade liberalization. Inevitably, asset quality in financial institutions deteriorated.
Starting in 1995, some of these institutions experienced severe liquidity problems, which prompted support
from the Central Bank. Eventually, this mushroomed into a full-blown crisis (see Section II.A).

4

Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators ()
198086

1986-94

1995/96

1996/97

1997/98

1998/99

1999/00

Output (real growth, %)
GDP(mp) percapita

-2.0

2.5

-0.3

-2.0

-2.7

-1.4

-0.9

GDPatmarketprices

-0.5

3.4

0.7

-1.4

-2.1

-0.5

0.0

Gross Domestic investment

20.7

27.2

31.8

32.3

32.4

29.0

29.6

External saving (=-CAB)
Gross national saving

9.9
10.3

3.9
21.0

2.4
30.0

1.5
30.7

5.6
27.7

3.0
26.0

4.5
25.1

Total revenues

28.1

31.8

30.4

28.3

27.0

28.3

31.2

Tax revenues
Total expenditures

26.5
38.7

27.7
30.2

26.1
28.8

24.8
34.8

25.2
35.1

26.6
35.6

28.1
35.5

30.5

24.6

24.1

Saving-Investment (% of GDP)

Central Government (% of GDP)

Current expenditure

Overall Balance

29.5

30.8

32.7

32.6

-10.6

1.6

1.5

-6.5

-8.1

-7.3

-4.3

17.8
-12.9

26.3
5.1

21.7
13.7

21.5
-6.9

9.1
-1.6

8.1
-4.3

6.3
-4.2

Other

Inflation Rate (average CPI, %)
Merchandise Exports (real growth, %)
ExportsofGoodsandServices(nominal,%)

2.1

9.9

24.8

-2.0

1.0

-1.3

0.2

REER (%, increase = appreciation)

4.0

-1.1

7.6

25.9

7.1

1.5

-3.8

External Public Debt (% GDP)

90.7

106.7

68.6

50.8

48.5

46.8

46.0

Total reserves excl. gold6)

Total reserves/M2 (%)

0.9

1.3

2.1

2.7

2.1

2.1

2.4

10.1

17.3

37.9

35.4

28.1

32.4

34.6

Source: BanJkofJamaica, IFS, IMF StaffReports, and Bank staffestimates
(i) Most indicators shown in Jamaican fiscal year, which runs from April I to March 31.
(iv) In months of imports of goods and services.

The financial sector crisis and its containment (1996-present). Economic growth was the big
casualty of financial sector distress (see Table 1). GDP registered zero or negative growth for the fourth
successive year in 1999/00. (In 2000/01, GDP growth may be modestly positive.) Also, as a result of
interventions to provide full protection to depositors and life insurance policy holders, public debt
accumulated rapidly, as reflected in the increasing debt-to-GDP ratio (see Chart 1). In the aftermath of crisis
containment, the authorities have progressively tightened fiscal policy. The central government's primary
surplus rose to an impressive 10 percent of GDP in 1999/00, and is slated to rise further in 2000/01. In
parallel, a strategy is in place for the resolution of the fnancial sector troubles (see Section II). Inflation has
also been reduced through tight monetary policy. However, this policy combination has had its costs,
including high interest rates and the consequences thereof, such as reduced incentives for private sector
investment, and declining competitiveness.! More importantly, the large interest payments arising from
growing public debt have crowded out public investment as well as other potentially growth-enhancing
expenditures.
11.

C. Poverty and Social Issues
12.
Despite Jamaica's poor track record of economic growth, many of the country's social indicators are
good and recent trends indicate declining poverty. Life expectancy at birth, which has been rising gradually,
is 69 and 72 years for males and females, respectively. Access to safe water and sanitary facilities has been
increasing. At the national level, over 80 percent of the population have access to safe water while
99 percent have access to sanitary facilities. The infant mortality rate, at 24.5 per thousand live births in

I While interest rates remain high, they have by and large been on a declining trend since December 1999. The benchmark sixmonth Treasury bill interest rate stood at 17.1 percent at end-September 2000. The real effective exchange rate has on balance
appreciated by over 30 percent since 1995/96.

i
0

I

~~~~~~~~~~4~4
1

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-

-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~k

i
A~~~0
*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4

~~~~~~~~~~
Q.~~~~~~~~~~j

f?).~~~~~~~~~~~~>400

e

s

44

.

.

.

.

14~~~~~~~~~4.-

6
1993 (the latest available official data on mortality), is well below the average for middle income countries.
Jamaica has also made considerable strides in addressing gender issues, although unemployment continues to
affect women disproportionately. Females have higher enrollment rates than males in secondary and tertiary
education, gender gaps in wages have decreased significantly, and female labor force participation, at
64 percent in 1997 (see Table 2), is among the highest in the region. On these and many other social
indicators, Jamaica compares favorably with similar-income countries in the Latin America and Caribbean
region. In addition, the Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions (JSLC), which has been monitoring living
standards annually since 1988, points to a generally declining trend in the incidence of poverty (see Box 1).
In 1999, the poverty headcount was an estimated 16.9 percent of the population (some 437,700 people),
down from 28.4 percent in 1990 and 26.1 percent in 1996.
13.
However, the forces which have worked to lower poverty during a period of sustained recession are
insufficiently understood (see Box 1) and are in need of further, systematic analysis. Although the reduction
in poverty in Jamaica has been associated with low or negative (measured) income growth, this trend runs
counter to the bulk of cross-country evidence, and it can safely be said that unless growth resumes, the gains
are likely to be temporary. Moreover, the incidence of poverty in Jamaica is already lower than in many
comparator countries. For these reasons, the key short-term challengefor Jamaica is to prevent reversal of
the recent declines in the incidence and severity ofpoverty.
There are also broader concerns
14.
relating to income and non-income
dimensions of poverty and inequality. In
Jamaica, the poor have disproportionately
low access to quality educational
opportunities, and are more exposed to
violence. Perhaps more significantly,
their age distribution-almost half of the
poor are under 18 and a further 10
coping
percent are over 65-limits
strategies, making the need for effective
and well-targeted social assistance
programs all the more critical (see
Section III.B). The concentration of
poverty among the young also increases
the severity of social problems related to
youth-at-risk. More broadly, inequalities
in living standards and opportunities
continue to be a major development
challenge. Enrollment in early childhood,
upper secondary, and tertiary education is
strongly correlated with economic status;
in addition, the quality of teaching is
substantially lower in inner city and rural
areas, where lower-income segments of
the population tend to be concentrated.

as exemplified by the impact of higher school dropout rates and
involvement in violence amnong boys on their educational
attainment and lifetime earning capabilities.
Table 2. Basic Gender Indicators

Education'
Illiteracy
(%)
(%of agegroup)
Childrenoutof School-Primary
(%ofagegroup)
Childrenoutof School-Secondary
Health

19.0
5.0
32.0

10.0
4.0
28.0

MaternalMortalityper 100,0002

-

115.0

(asa% oftotalpopulation
WomenwithHIV/AIDS
3
withHIV/AIDS)
(years)
LifeExpectancy
LaborMarketOutcomes
LaborForceParticipation(%)
Rates(%)
Unemployment
Youth Unemployment Rate (%/)
EarningsInequality
production
Hoursof household
production/market
6
Violence
Homiciderate/million

-

31.0

69.0

72.0

82.0
10.0
24.6
100.0
9.9

64.0
23.1
42.7
90.0
21.5

e

297(a)

n

Decision
Making
Womenin ariament (%)4
Womenat a ministerial
level()4

-

116

6.0

Also, despite being better off than most

have
Jamnaicadoe
does have
countries,Janiaca
comparatorcompartor
contries
and
some gender concerns-females
are
households
female-headed
disproportionately exposed to poverty
and unemployment. Jamaica also has a
"reverse gender problem" in the making,

malesand females,howevermosthomicide
is the
rate for both
(a) Thisand
victims
perpetrators
are men.
WorldBankweb page,2 lN, Women'sWorld
Sources:' Genderstats,
database,5EconomicandSocial
2000,4LACGENDER
1995,3 UNIFEM,
Surveyof Jamaica,6 GlobalReporton Crimeand Justice,Graeme
Newman,Editor.

7

One of the most pressing challengesin the social agenda in Jamaica-and one that has substantial
15.
spilloversonto other social problems-concerns youth-at-risk. At least six interrelatedfactors underliethe
challengeof youth-at-risk:(i) poverty;(ii) low qualityof educationand high rates of absencefrom school;
(iii) lack of employmentopportunities;(iv) poor reproductivehealth and high rates of teenagepregnancy;
(v) unstablehome environments,poor parenting,and lack of guidance;and (vi) involvementin or exposure
to illicit and violent activities, including domestic violence. Significant efforts have been made by
Government,NGOs, and developmentpartners to implement a wide range of youth-at-risk programs.
Nevertheless,many risk factors continueto prevail, threateningthe potentialof young people to grow into
responsibleand productiveadults. Everyyear, morethan 14,000babies are born to teenagers,and teenage
fertilityrates continueto increase. Many youth, particularlythose from poor and low-incomehouseholds,
are neither in school nor employed. In addition, youth increasinglyface special health or developmental
needs;for example,almosta quarterof all reportedHIV/AIDScases are in the 20-29 age group.
II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, PROSPECTS AND RISKS
A. The 1996/97 Financial Sector Intervention and its Aftermath
The Financial Crisis. The incipient financial sector problems outlined in paragraphs 10 and 11
16.
were accompanied by a reversal of fiscal consolidation efforts and an increase in money supply growth,
under pressure from excessive wage settlements and efforts to eliminate central bank losses. Inflation
accelerated in the second half of 1995, even as GDP growth turned negative. In response, the Government
made inflation reduction a primary objective of its economic program while holding the nominal exchange
rate stable, which required the implementation of a tight monetary policy. While inflation fell sharply,
interest rates rose substantially, and the real effective exchange rate appreciated. This exacerbated
recessionary tendencies, created more non-performing loans, including those for real estate, and led to
erosion of confidence and some shift to financial institutions which enjoyed greater confidence, particularly
foreign-owned ones. (Nevertheless, the management of these problems was rendered easier by domestic
depositors' not switching to overseas deposits, and the fact that there was no balance of payments crisis.)
17.
With a systemic threat looming, the Government decided to intervene in domestic financial
institutions, de facto insuring all depositors for their total exposure in order to stave off a financial collapse
and prevent a run against the domestic currency.2 In January 1997, it created the Financial Sector

3
AdjustmentCompany(FINSAC)to restoreliquidityto and restructurethe distressedfinancial institutions.

FINSAC is a government-owned limited liability company which operates as an extra-budgetary institution.

Initially financedby Government,FINSAC subsequentlybegan issuing its own (government-guaranteed)
securities. Its modus operandi was to capitalize intervened entities by purchasing shares, making
subordinated loans and purchasing bad loans and related assets (including significant real estate assets) using
FINSAC notes that allowed for interest to be capitalized.
Evolution of treatment of intervened institutions. The Intervention phase of FINSAC's operations
18.
was largely completed by end-March 1998, with FINSAC acquiring control in five of nine commercial
banks, three building societies, five merchant banks, and five insurance companies. FINSAC has since
advanced significantly in its Rehabilitation and Investment phase, and has merged the operations of all
FlNSAC-controlled banking institutions into two banks-Union Bank of Jamaica (UBJ) and National
Commercial Bank (NCB). Rehabilitation of the insurance sector has also been undertaken, involving the
severing of links between insurance companies and related banks. Currently, all the institutions are being
prepared for divestment of the public sector ownership acquired as a result of intervention.
As has beenthe case in manybanldngcrisesin other countries,the Governmentdidnot considerit feasibleto imposesignificant
burden-sharing,particularlyon depositors,arguingthat protectingdepositorswas crucialfor maintainingsocial stability.
2

For more details regardingthe financial sector, see Memorandumof the President for the Bank Restructuringand Debt
ManagementProgram(documentR2000-198),the firstphaseof whichis beingpresentedto the Boardtogetherwiththe CAS.
3

19.
Costs of the Intervention. While FINSAC has played a noteworthy role in keeping the financial
sector afloat, the costs of intervention turned out to be much greater than initially anticipated by the
Government. Total gross cumulative support to intervened financial institutions amounted to 37 percent of
GDP by end-March 2000. High interest rates and a declining GDP have led to severely adverse debt
dynamics, in spite of some decline in external debt. Total public debt (net of intra-public sector debt)
increased from 102 percent of GDP at end-March 1996 to 131 percent at end-March 2000.
20.
The crisis has had strong repercussions on GDP, which failed to expand for the fourth consecutive
year in 1999/00. Private sector uncertainty as to when the Government would explicitly recognize the costs
of intervention in the financial sector (recently resolved, as detailed below) has, along with high interest
rates, reduced incentives for private investment. In addition, allowing for data inaccuracies, it appears that
the efficiency of private investment has seen a further decline from already low levels, given the negative
GDP growth rates since 1996/97 (see Box 2). Public sector investment has also declined significantly,
crowded out by increasing recurrent expenditures on wages and interest payments on a swelling domestic
debt. Capital expenditure on externally-funded projects declined sharply from 3.7 percent of GDP in
1995/96 to 1.8 percent of GDP in 1999/00, and is budgeted to fall further to 1.6 percent of GDP in 2000/01.
lBox2: Whydogh Invebshent; Rae Vnotled to Grotii? The Inetet
?uzle
Jamaica's gross domesticitr
asm urthe
Nil
A
t
av
over 30 percentof GDP in
the last fiveyears. Yet,g
th b
rlowieo
neat
Measurement errors, mg
if
theg
othe ng
d
economy,leading
to undersatementof G
GD
th,
d an overtat
fthe ivt
oDrio.
Allocation iufficien iie
aia
tio
et
rin
iail
sector crisis, and
because real exchangee
ppitces
ives
finv
t
on bad
that resources do not
Adverseseleftion, dt

hireal

int

ra

ading tc

got ofus

As in the case of the p
pu2zl,i her isttle
dsding
of t relieaty
factors. Yet, rtoing
tst
priorit f
amc
aly
understandthe invetngrthpzlea,oreesowf
growhand

instead
and fvoring risky

c

power of these different
needed to better
t
.

21.
Jamaica's competitiveness has deteriorated substantially since the financial crisis began. Between
1995 and 1999, the real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by almost 30 percent, even taking
account of a 5 percent depreciation in 1999. This has arisen from the high interest rates (which create
incentives to acquire and hold Jamaican assets) that have resulted from tight monetary policy and large
government borrowing requirements. Nevertheless, the Government has been reluctant to allow a significant
real depreciation of the exchange rate, on the grounds that this would generate unpredictable wage-price
dynamics and could rekindle inflation. While the authorities maintain that the real effective exchange rate
should not be allowed to appreciate further, they have indicated that efforts to improve competitiveness will
focus on labor market and other structural reforms.
22.
The intermediary role of the financial sector has also been considerably impaired as a result of the
financial sector crisis-and this may help to explain the decline in the efficiency of investment. First, nonintervened banks, including subsidiaries of foreign banks, find it more attractive to invest in high-yield
government paper than to extend loans in an uncertain macroeconomic environment. Second, the intervened
banks, whose functioning is closely guided by FINSAC and the Bank of Jamaica, lack the capacity, mandate
and liquidity to act as intermediaries and to extend credit to the economy. The Government's strategy to date
has consisted of providing the intervened banks with minimal liquidity injections made through FINSAC to
keep them afloat and pay a small portion of interest on F1NSAC notes, while capitalizing the remaining
interest obligations.
23.
Trends in the Real Economy. The shrinking of the economy since 1996/97 is reflected in the
performance of the key economic sectors. The manufacturing sector has been in decline since 1995,
reflecting a contraction in most sub-sectors, including the once vibrant apparel industry. The contraction in

9

the apparel sub-sector reflected, inter alia, eroding competitiveness. The mining sector has grown at a
modest rate of 3 percent per year since 1996, largely reflecting capacity constraints. With the tapering off of
the growth in hotel room construction as well as the adverse impact of high interest rates on residential
investment, the construction sector has registered consecutive declines every year since 1996. The generally
weak performance of the agricultural sector since 1996 reflects, among other things, the impact of the failed
privatization of the sugar industry, the loss of competitiveness in other export crops including bananas, as
well as adverse weather conditions. In the services sector, although tourism continued to post modest growth
and telecommunications has been buoyed by significant capital investment from Cable and Wireless, the
contractions in financial services and real estate held back overall performance.

B. Recent Developments:EnhancedPolicy Commitment
The realities of the financial sector distress and its repercussions forced the Government to take
24.
strong steps, foremost being corrective fiscal measures, even as FINSAC continued its efforts to restore the
health of the financial sector. Successive steps ensured that the central government primary surplus as a
percentage of GDP increased from 2 percent in 1997/98 to 6 percent in 1998/99 and 10 percent in 1999/00.
The budget for 2000/01 (April 2000-March 2001) promised even more restraint, bringing the primary
surplus up to an anticipated 12.6 percent of GDP. The Government then requested the IMF to undertake a
two-year Staff Monitored Program (SMP), which was approved in July 2000, taking effect retroactively from
April 1, 2000. Implementation of this program would reverse the adverse public debt dynamics.
Simultaneously, the Minister of Finance and Planning, in his 2000/01 budget speech, announced a
25.
plan for resolving the issue of outstanding FINSAC liabilities (as committed to subsequently under the
SMP). The details of the resolution plan are now being implemented with assistance from the IDB, the CDB
and the Bank. The proposed program seeks to address not only the key fiscal issue-by using all proceeds of
sales of FINSAC-owned assets as well as of loans from the IFIs to retire debt, canceling most intra-public
sector debt, and explicitly assuming, as of end-March 2001, all remaining FINSAC liabilities as cashinterest-paying government liabilities-but also the restructuring and divestment of intervened institutions
and a strengthening of the prudential and supervisory environment in order to reduce the risk of recurrence of
financial crisis. Regulation of banking activity to prevent illicit activity is also being strengthened.4 The final
resolution of FINSAC, including the disposal of FINSAC assets and liquidation of FINSAC debt, should
help ease the adverse economic conditions and rebuild confidence.
The economy also looks in better shape than it did 2-3 years ago (see Annex B6). Inflation is down
26.
to single digits; foreign reserves grew in 1999/00 by about US$100 million to 2.4 months of import cover at
year-end; the current account deficit, despite widening to 4.5 percent of GDP, was largely financed by
foreign direct investment; external debt service was under 20 percent of exports of goods and services; and
short-term foreign liabilities were below 83 percent of reserves at end-1999/00. Nevertheless, important
concerns remain. GDP growth was around zero in 1999/00 (albeit up from negative rates in previous years),
and the much-anticipated turnaround in the real sector has yet to be confirmed. Interest rates, though on a
declining path, continue to be high. The public debt-to-GDP ratio has continued to mount (but ought to be
reversed if the authorities' program keeps on track). Restoring growth is clearly the key economic challenge
for the Government.

Regulationsagainst money launderingare discussed in the Memorandumof the Presidenton the BRDP. Briefly,money
launderingis a criminaloffenseas per the MoneyLaunderingAct of 1996. The centralbank also issuedguidancenotes on money
launderingin July 2000, which include proceduresfor reporting of suspicioustransactions(whose reporting has now become
mandatory).Jamaicais a memberof the CaribbeanFinancialAction TaskForce,a regionalinitiativeto achievecompliancewith the
FinancialActionTask Force(FATF)recommendations,and is not in the FATFlist of non-cooperativecountriesin the international
anti-moneylaunderingcampaign. Also,the Governmentintendsshortlyto set up a FinancialCrimesDivisionunderthe Officeof the
Directorof PublicProsecutionsto tackle financialcrimes,includingmoneylaundering.
4

10

C. EconomicOutlook
27.
The major economic challenges facing the Government in its effort to restart growth are: (a) the
adverse debt dynamics due to a heavy debt burden in the face of high interest rates; (b) a fragile financial
sector with limited intermediation due partly to inadequate liquidity; (c) continuing structural weaknesses in
the public sector as well as in the labor market; and (d) a distortion in the incentives for trade arising from a
currency that has on balance appreciated significantly, following years of tight monetary policy.
28.
Outlook under authorities'program. To address the above challenges, the Government's program
carries a commitment under the SMP to making even stronger fiscal adjustments in 2000/01 and 2001/02
than in the previous two years, with the aim of reducing the public sector borrowing requirement and
bringing about a sustained reduction in interest rates. Financial sector issues are being squarely addressed,
with commitments made under the SMP and developed further under the program supported by the IDB, the
CDB and the Bank. The tight fiscal stance will complement planned monetary measures, including a
lowering of the cash reserve requirements from 15 percent currently to 12 percent by March 2001 and
9 percent by March 2002, in order to make more credit available for the private sector. Structural reforms,
especially in the public sector, will be accelerated, and efforts to improve the quality of expenditure under the
Public Sector Modernization Program (see Section III.C), supported by the Bank, will be continued. These
combined measures are expected to have a positive impact on the debt dynamics. Growth is expected to
resume, based on improved financial sector intermediation, declining interest rates, and higher private sector
confidence, thereby encouraging higher and more efficient investment by the private sector. Sectorally, this
growth is expected to be driven by output increases in bauxite, transport and communications, electricity and
water services, and financial services.
29.
The program thus targets steady restoration of growth in GDP, starting with 1.5 percent in 2000/01
(compared with zero growth in 1999/00) and rising to 3.5 percent in 2004/05, as well as a steady decline in
interest rates (180 day T-bill rate) from 17.9 percent at the end of 1999/005 to 14 percent and 12.9 percent,
respectively, at end-2000/01 and end-2001/02. Under this growth and interest rate profile, projected
outcomes include a firm decline in the hitherto rising debt-to-GDP ratio, an increase in reserves, and a
marginal increase in external debt. The expected outcomes are summarized in Table 3 6
30.
An alternative scenario, also discussed with the authorities under the SMP, gives an indication of
what the outlook could be like under less favorable developments.7 It is possible, for example, that interest
rates may not decline at the pace or to the extent projected in Table 3. In addition, recovery in output could
be slower, due for example to the impact of continued drought on the agricultural sector. Accordingly,
interest rates assumed in this scenario are 15.9 percent and 15 percent, respectively, at the end of 2000/01
and 2001/02. Growth over the five-year period beginning 2000/01 would increase from 0.5 percent to
2.5 percent, versus the 1.5 percent and 3.5 percent targeted under the authorities' program. Other details of
this alternative scenario can be found in Annex C and in the SMP document.8 As can be expected, the
alternative scenario sees a longer and more difficult period of adjustment, with the public debt-to-GDP ratio
declining more slowly. Extra care would be needed under such a scenario to ensure that the needs of the
poor, such as essential social services and protection through social safety nets, are met.
At the time of preparationof the SMP, an earlierauctionrate in March2000 of 19.7percentwas quoted,and used as a basis for
the projections.
5

At the time of preparationof the SMP, it was assumedthat the intra-public-sectordebt would be fully written off or offset.
Morerecently,it has beenagreed that a part (J$13.2billion)of the centralbank'sholding of FINSACpaper wouldbe convertedinto
governmentsecuritiespayingcashinterest.
6

Note that the differencebetweenthe two scenariosarisesnot from a fundamentaldifferencein policystances, but rather from
differencesin assumptionsaboutexogenousconditionsand privatesectorresponsesin the economy(e.g. on portfolioallocationand
investmentdecisions).

7

8

See the authorities' Memorandumof Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP), 2000/01-2001/02(Annex to IMF SMP,

EBS/00/1 52), summarized in Table 10 of that document.

11

Table 3: Outlook for Selected Economic Indicators under the Authorities' Program
Key Indicators
(in %unlessotherwiseindicated)
Output
Growthof RealGDP
Growthof Realper capitaGDP
Prices
Inflationrate (CPIend of period)
Interestrates (180-dayT-bills)
Average exchange rate (LCU/US$)

PublicFinance(% of GDP)
Totalpublicdebt(net of intra-publicsectordebt)
Publicsectorprimarybalance
Centralgovernmentbalance
External
Currentaccount/GDP
Grossofficialreserves(US$ million)
Debt Service/Exports

Estimate

Projection -------------

--------------

1999/00 2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

0.0
-0.9

1.5
0.6

2.5
1.7

2.8
2.0

3.2
2.4

3.5
2.7

8.4
17.9

7.0
14.0

6.5
12.9

6.0
12.4

5.0
11.1

4.0
10.0

40.1

-

-

-

-

-

131.2

122.9

114.1

107.3

100.6

93.7

12.5
-4.3

14.1
-1.0

13.2
1.3

12.0
1.3

11.6
1.6

11.1
2.0

4.5
801.3
17.9

-4.8
1077.6
15.7

-5.3
1221.0
16.4

-5.3
988.9
26.1

-4.6
1017.2
13.8

-4.1
1064.6
12.5

D. Risks
31.
While the authorities' program is careful and comprehensive in formulation, it faces very
unfavorable initial conditions. Specifically, public sector debt was 131 percent of GDP at end-March 2000
(including external debt of 46 percent of GDP, excluding intra-public sector debt). Under the agreed
financial sector resolution strategy, beginning April 2001, interest on the stock of these liabilities would be
serviced by the Treasury in cash, in contrast to the current policy of capitalizing interest on these liabilities.
The combined cash interest payments on all liabilities (projected at 14 percent in 2001/02) puts a major
burden on public finances and calls for additional fiscal tightening. Stabilization and improvement in the
debt dynamics can be expected under a reasonable range of growth and interest rate profiles, but-at least
under conditions likely to prevail in the immediate future-at the cost of maintaining a very tight fiscal
stance with very little flexibility (see Annex D). Because the very limited room for maneuver, the
macroeconomic outlook carries significant risks. Three broad categories of risks can be visualized, relating
in turn to the external environment, sluggish response in the domestic economy, and policy-related events
(see Section IV.E for a discussion of risk mitigation).
32.
External Environment. Possible external shocks include adverse commodity price movements.
Other things equal, these would increase the current account deficit (projected, under the authorities'
program, at an average of 5 percent of GDP over 2000/01-2003/04) and financing needs. If the price of
alumina, which together with bauxite is expected to contribute about half of merchandise export earnings in
2000/01, were to remain flat (the program assumes an increase of 7 percent), the current account would
deteriorate by about US$50 million, or 0.7 percent of GDP. Similarly, if energy price increases (petroleum
and energy products account for about 15 percent of merchandise imports) were to average 50 (75) percent
above their level last year (as compared with the 12 percent increase assumed), at projected volumes the
additional import bill would amount to US$127 million (US$196 million). While adverse shocks could
likely be weathered, a compounding of such shocks cannot be ruled out, and the impact of these could be
aggravated by the erosion in competitiveness and self-imposed constraints on allowing equilibrating
exchange rate movements. For example, if higher current account deficits were to occur simultaneously with
shortfalls in foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows (the authorities' program assumes very significant
financing by FDI), beyond a point such higher financing requirements could not be sustained through
additional external borrowing or reserve drawdown. In addition, the impact of rising oil prices on the prices
of electricity and water, as well as the pass-through effect of such increases, could trigger inflationary
impulses and create pressure for wage increases.

12

33.
Weak Domestic Response. Factors which could slow recovery in the domestic economy include a
slower-than-expected decline in domestic interest rates, a weak private sector supply response, and austeritydriven labor action or social unrest. In particular, the potential supply response (including the extent to
which the recent erosion of competitiveness might curb the supply response for exports) remains difficult to
predict. In addition, while Jamaica has been fortunate in evading natural disasters, such as hurricanes, in
recent years, such events can cause major disruption in economic activity and entail large reconstruction
costs.
34.
Policy Risks. Finally, risks of delays and/or slippage in the implementation of the macroeconomic
and structural reform program cannot be ruled out. Such delays could, for example, arise as a result of
domestic consensus-building difficulties on reforms or shortcomings in implementation capacity. While the
authorities' commitment is strong and implementation of the program is on track thus far, it is clear that
setbacks of this type would undermine the fragile prospects for recovery.

IH. FRAMEWORK FOR POVERTY REDUCTIONAND SUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENT
35.
At the dawn of the new millennium, the formulation and development of Jamaica's economic and
social policies and programs will be guided by the vision for an efficient, globally competitive and growing
economy, creating jobs for a vibrant, healthy and educated population, caring for its environment in a just,
secure and equitable society.9 . The Government recognizes that achieving this vision involves, in the short
and medium term, the restoration of economic growth to create employment and improve living standards.
In addition, given the goal that "... achievement of broader social and environmental goals must be attained
simultaneously with economic growth", continued emphasis will be placed on human and social
development, support for labor-intensive growth and rural development and, given the economic dependence
on natural resources, an improved framework for environmental management. In particular, the poor and
vulnerable must be adequately protected, which requires a special focus on children, who comprise
49 percent of the poor in Jamaica. The Government seeks to pursue these objectives within a context of
good governance, including openness, transparency, accountability and a participatory democracy.
36.
Four Elements of a Sustainable Poverty Reduction Strategy. There is broad consensus among
the Government, civil society, and the country's bilateral and multilateral development partners on the
development agenda for the future. This agenda, which is detailed in the Government's Medium-Term
Strategy, rests on four pillars, as can be seen in Chart 2.

A. RestoringEconomicGrowth
37.
Although growth alone is not sufficient to reduce poverty, and even though the growth-poverty
linkage is insufficiently understood, the Government and other stakeholders recognize that restoring and
maintaining growth is a prerequisite not only for long-term poverty reduction but also to prevent a reversal of
the recent gains in poverty reduction (see Section I.C).
38.
Rehabilitating the financial seetor. By allocating resources efficiently, well-functioning financial
systems play a key role in the process of economic growth. The financial crisis has significantly impaired
the Jamaican financial sector's ability to play that role (see Section II). Moreover, the financial sector itself
accounts for a significant fraction of Jamaica's real GDP, so a decline in value added originating in the
financial sector has a major impact on overall growth. Cognizant of this, the authorities are implementing a
comprehensive restructuring plan for the financial sector, in partnership with the IFIs (see Section II.B), in
order to encourage greater competition, foster development of strong and well-capitalized financial
institutions, and reduce the vulnerability of the system to future crises. This, together with a tightened fiscal

Governmentof Jamaica,"Jamaica:Medium-TermStrategy(MTS), 2000-2002",June 2000. Prior to the MTS, a National
IndustrialPolicywas preparedin 1996to providea systematicapproachto long-termgrowthand sustainabledevelopment.
9

13

stanceand a resultantdeclinein interestrates,is expectedto improvefinancialintermediationand enablethe
privatesectorto draw on a highershare of the considerabledomesticsavingsin orderto fuelhighergrowth.
39.
Consolidatingfiscal policy. The Governmentis acutely aware of the problems createdby the
adverse fiscal situation that was brought on by the financial sector interventionand excessive wage
settlements.In response,it has embarkedon even greaterfiscaltighteningthan in previousyears and stepped
up efforts to improvethe effectivenessof public expenditure(see Section III.C). Elementsof the fiscal
strategy include maintaininglarge primary surpluses;reducing the debt stock by using the proceedsof
planneddivestmentsof public enterprisesand intervenedfinancialinstitutions;loweringinterestrates based
on a reduced public sector borrowingrequirement; maintaininga presence in internationalmarkets to
diversify funding sources and maintain an adequatelevel of foreign reserves; and improving securities
management. On the revenueside, since the tax ratio, at around31 percent of GDP in 1999/00,is already
high, new measuresfocuson strengtheningtax administration.Shouldmacroeconomicdevelopmentsbe less
favorablethan anticipated,the Governmenthas indicatedthat it is preparedto consideradditionalrevenue
and expendituremeasures.
40.
Strengtheningthe frameworkfor privateinvestment.With
geographical proximity to North America, an English-speaking
workforce and major tourist attractions, Jamaica has significant
potentialto enjoy private-sector-driven,
export-ledgrowth. However,
this growthpotentialhas not been realized,owinglargelyto structural,
regulatory,and macroeconomicconstraintswhich have reduced the
efficiency of and the incentives for private investment (see Box 2).10
41.

Much of the Government's economic program is devoted to

strengtheningprivate incentivesby, inter alia, improvingfinancial
sectorintermediationand creatinga frameworkfor a declinein interest
rates (paras. 38-39), reducing labor market rigidities(paras. 50-51),

Chart2: Four Elementsof
a Sustainable Poverty
Reduction Strategy
Restoring
EconomicGrowth
1.Rehabilitatingthe financialsector
2. Consolidatingfiscalpolicy
3. Strengtheningthe frameworkfor

private
investment
Protecting
thePoorand
Ensuring
Inclusion

and helping to provide a better-trained work force (paras. 46-47). To

1.Enhancingthe efficiencyand

combat the high level of crime and violence, which deters both
domestic and foreign investment,the Ministry of National Security

effectiveness
ofsocial
safety
nets
2.1mprovingeducationalaccessand

and Justice has adopted an integrated approach to develop public order
programs in which other ministries have critical roles to play. The

3. Improvinghealthservices
4. Stimulatinglabor-intensive
growth

police force is focusing on community policing and enhancing
intelligence-gathering.In the legal system,the focus is on improving
access to justice and strengthening alternative dispute resolution

Improving
Governance,
EfficiencyandEffecCiveness
in thePublicSector

mechanisms. The Govermment is also attempting to deal with the

shortcomingsin infrastructureservices, especiallywater shortages,
inadequateseweragefacilities,and a deficientroad network,that have
impacted production and tourism adversely. It is also making efforts

to strengthenthe urban publictransportsystem(as evidencedby recent
improvementsin the Kingston MetropolitanArea transport system)
that has long restrictedmobilityand employmentopportunitiesamong
the poor, increasingtheir sense of isolation. Over the next fifteen
years, additional investment requirements in the infrastructure sectors
are estimated to be more than US$600 million in power and

US$1 billionin the water sector.

I. Divestingfrom commercial

activities
2. Improvingmanagementand
informiation
systems
3.Reformingpublic maagementand

incentives
EnsuringSustainable
Development
1.Generatingsynergyin the
2. Stimulatngseucotnaionmablrelationship
development
3. Linkingtourismandsustainable
development

l' The externaltrade regimedoesnot pose major issuesfor Jamaicaat present. The
average import tariff is 20 percent,with a lower 5 percent rate for capital goods.
Whilethe preferentialmarketaccess is likelyto be erodedin the case of bananasand
sugar, it has improved greatly in the apparels industry. The key issues for
international access relate to Jamaica's own competitiveness.

3. Improvingdisasterpreparedness

14
Realizing that the public sector does not have the resources or the capacity to undertake such investments,
Government is keen to invite further private participation in infrastructure (see paras. 53-54). Finally, at the
sector level, the Government is paying particular attention to the information technology industry which,
while presently contributing less than 1 percent of GDP, has the potential to grow and become an important
part of Jamaica's economy
42.
The Government expects these measures to enhance private sector confidence and induce higher and
more efficient investment weighted towards re-tooling and re-engineering (for improving competitiveness
and productivity). Over the medium term, it expects output increases from sectors such as bauxite,
information technology, transport and communications, electricity and water services, and financial services.
B. Protecting the Poor and Ensuring Inclusion
43.
Enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of social safety nets. Recent analyses, supported inter
alia by the Bank, have pointed to several deficiencies in the existing array of social safety net programs in
Jamaica."1 While many of these programs provide much-needed assistance to the poor and vulnerable,
identified shortcomings include: errors of inclusion or exclusion, combined with low average benefits
received by the needy; high administrative overheads; fragmentation of programs, coupled with lack of
consolidated eligibility criteria; and inadequate tailoring of programs to age-specific poverty or vulnerability
factors.
44.
To address these shortcomings, the Government is in the process of preparing a comprehensive
action plan for the reform of social safety nets, the framework for which has recently been presented to the
Human Resource Council of the Cabinet. It has identified the following as target groups of the reform:
children in poverty; youth at risk; the elderly poor; the disabled; poor single-parent households; large poor
(rural) families; the long-term unemployed; and victims of social or natural disaster. Special priority is to be
given to children and youth (see Section I.C).
45.
In line with the broader reform objectives, several initiatives are under active consideration by the
Government. Among other measures, the major income transfer programs (such as the Food Stamp, Social
and Economic Assistance, and the Poor Relief programs) are proposed to be consolidated into a unified
income transfer program. Total spending on the consolidated program is proposed to increase substantially
(based on re-allocation from other programs) to ensure a meaningful level of benefits, alongside the
introduction of a cost-efficient, transparent and easily accessible delivery mechanism. Access to the program
will be linked to such criteria as school attendance, where appropriate, in order to reinforce behavioral
change and break the intergenerational cycle of poverty. It is also proposed that other programs will be
eliminated or modified using criteria such as administrative costs, level of benefit and coverage, delivery
mechanism, and degree of targeting to the poor. A universal targeting mechanism, including a case
management approach, is expected to be established, and capacity to monitor and evaluate the impact of
programs strengthened. Specific measures are also planned to improve the targeting of school feeding and
drug provision programs, and to increase cost recovery from those able to pay. Owing to the high priority
that the Government is placing on poor children and youth, an early childhood development programpossibly based on the model of the "roving care-givers"-is expected to be scaled up, and possibilities for
implementing a new youth employment scheme explored. It is expected that the implementation of these and
other specific reform measures will be supported, inter alia, by Bank and IDB projects under preparation.

11 Socialsafetynet programsare definedbroadlyto includeprogramsthat provideincomesupportand access to basic servicesto
the poor and needyand/orthose needing assistanceafter economicdownturns,naturaldisasters,or household-specificidiosyncratic
events that lowerincome. Existingsocial assistanceprograms,on whichpublicspendingamountedto some 1.2 percentof GDP in
1998, includeincomesupportprograms,school-basedassistanceprograms,community-basedprograms,labor market interventions,
drug provisionprograms,indigenthousing programs,feedingprograms,small-scaleinvestmentprograms,as well as support for
relevantNGO programs.

15

46.
Improving educational access and outcomes. Jamaica stands out, particularly in comparison with
other similar-income-level countries, in having almost universalized 9 years of education. However, the
enrolment rate declines in upper secondary education, and is closely associated with income levels. Major
efforts are thus needed to increase the number of school places beyond grade nine, and to improve learning
outcomes at all levels. The key beneficiaries of qualitative improvement and quantitative expansion of
education will be poor children, who are at the margin of both achievement and access, and are most at risk
of being drawn into unemployment, violence, and delinquency. The Government's Green Paper 2000:
Education-the Way Upward recognizes that building human and social capital through education and
training represents the best hope for economic growth and social peace.
47.
To address the challenges, the Government integrated early childhood care, development and
education for children from birth to six years. Investment in this sub-sector is supported by the CDB and
there is proposed support from CIDA. At the primary level, where there is near-universal enrolment, the
emphasis is on improving quality, including retention and remediation at grade four, in partnership with the
IDB. At the secondary level, the Government has implemented a broad-ranging Reform of Secondary
Education (ROSE) program since 1993. After successfully focusing on improvement in junior secondary
education (Grades 7 to 9) in the 1990s with the support of the Bank, the thrust in this decade is to expand
enrollment and improve quality in senior secondary education. The target is to ensure that by 2002, every
child in Jamaica entering the secondary level will have access to at least five years of secondary education.
Key areas of proposed emphasis include: (i) a focus on learning outcomes, with complementary policy and
inputs to support its realization; (ii) strengthening teacher skills and improving efficiency and incentives in
the use of teachers' services; and (iii) reforming education finance, notably through equalization of public
allocations to different school types and improving cost sharing and reducing financial assistance program
leakage at both the secondary and tertiary level.
48.
Improving health services. While Jamaica's health gains over the last 25 years have been
impressive, a changing demographic and epidemiological profile poses major challenges to maintaining the
health status of the population. The aging of Jamaica's population and other factors have shifted the causes
of morbidity and mortality toward chronic and degenerative conditions which, if not addressed through
preventive and educational efforts, are likely to result increasingly in expensive hospital admissions. Also,
Jamaica, like other Caribbean countries, has a high HIV/AIDS prevalence rate among adults (0.99 percent
compared with 0.57 percent in Latin America).
49.
In order to address sectoral challenges in a comprehensive manner, in 1995 the Ministry of Health
(MOH) created a Health Reform Unit (HRU) within the MOH. Directions for health reform have emerged
from recommendations of HRU studies, conducted with technical assistance from the IDB and other
development partners. The reform program under implementation encompasses substantial changes in the
financing and organization of the sector in an effort to improve sustainability, efficiency, equity, and quality
of service delivery. A national health insurance system is under development to allow for increased
sustainability of health care financing in the face of fiscal constraints, and greater equity and access to care
for the less fortunate. Measures have been implemented to separate policy-making and operational functions
through the decentralization of service delivery (with the creation of regional health authorities). This allows
for increased accountability and better management (including significantly larger, though still modest, cost
recovery), and increases the sector's ability to respond to emerging problems. Complementary measures to
strengthen human resource management and health service delivery are contributing to improved quality of
services. The reform measures also take into account the Government's desire for enhanced partnership with
the private sector, reflecting the latter's growing and dominant role in ambulatory, diagnostic and
pharmaceutical services.
50.
Stimulating labor-intensive growth. Although it is true that poverty is predominantly a
phenomenon of the working poor, labor market and wage rigidities in Jamaica have nevertheless exacerbated
the unemployment problems that accompany a low growth economy. Characteristics of the labor market
which are of concern include high unemployment among women and youth; a growing share of the informal
sector in total employment (implying lower worker protection); a wage-setting mechanism in the formal
sector that is not well-suited to deal with large fluctuations in inflation, and creates nominal wage rigidity in

16
the short run; and harsh and freuent labor conflicts, even though the establishment of a Pre-Conciliation
Unit in the Ministry of Labour has helped reduce the number of work stoppages after 1997. The "no
victimization" rule (under which employers take back all striking employees after the strike is over) is one
reason why workers resort frequently to strikes. Moreover, dispute resolution lacks effectiveness owing to
the long delay in settlement, even though tribunal awards are considered fair.
51.
As recommended by its Committee on Labor Market Reforms in 1996, the Government has made
several attempts to implement a social pact during the last three years. However, while some progress has
been made at the individual sector level, including in the banana and bauxite industries, this has not gained
wider acceptance. Outstanding issues on the Government's agenda include the need to modernize the
collective bargaining process, introduce preventive conciliation, and reduce the time lag in tribunal awards.
The Government realizes that any delay in addressing these issues will mean that even when growth
recovers, employment growth, especially in the formal sector, is likely to lag, and employers' incentives to
use less labor-intensive technology than warranted by Jamaica's underlying factor endowments are likely to
persist.
C. Improving Governance, Efficiency and Effectiveness in the Public Sector
52.
While significantly lower than in the 1980s, overall public employment in Jamaica, at some
30 employees per thousand people, continues to be substantial. Organizational and incentive deficiencies,
such as proliferation of agencies, inefficient business practices, and a lack of focus on results and
accountability have often translated into low quality of services delivered. Jamaica's response to these
challenges has been proactive, both in disengaging the state from non-core, commercial activities, and
especially in seeking more efficient and effective fulfillment of core public sector mandates through better
financial management, information and incentive systems and, more recently, through broader New Public
Management initiatives.
53.
Divesting from commercial activities. Over the last decade, Jamaica has made considerable
progress in divesting public utilities, though some 150 enterprises remain in the public sector, including
many engaged in commercial activities such as petro-chemicals, marketing boards, industry-specific banks,
tourism, and social and economic infrastructure such as ports, electricity, water and housing. Jamaica's
experience with privatizing state activities has yielded mixed results, including reacquisition of privatized
activities (sugar and transport), continuation of financial support after privatization (air transport), and postprivatization establishment of a high-cost monopoly (telecommunications), and this has led to some
ambivalence towards further privatization and private participation.
54.
However, the Government remains committed to private sector partnerships as an important means
of improving services and reducing the fiscal burden, and is moving ahead with private participation in the
power utility, the Jamaica Public Service Company (slated for divestment by March 2001), the water utility,
and the two international airports. Options are also under consideration in roads and railways. Inviting wellestablished and competent private management and financing in these sectors would require action on a
broad range of issues, including transparent and competitive procedures for award of contracts and a stable
and transparent regulatory framework that promotes investor confidence and protects consumer interests. To
this end, the Office of Utility Regulation (OUR) was established in 1997 with jurisdiction over electricity,
telecommunications, water and sanitation, and transport. Though initially mandated to regulate only new
utilities, an amendment is now in Parliament to allow it to regulate existing enterprises as well. Also, in
order to reap the full benefits of privatization, the Government is introducing competitive structures-in
telecommunications, for example, the initial privatization with a 25-year exclusivity agreement is now being
renegotiated to reduce the exclusivity period to 1-3 years and invite competition in the sector. Despite these
initiatives, there remains a perception within the Government that it is becoming increasingly difficult to
interest private investors in the remaining state holdings.
Improving management and information systems. Government initiatives since 1991 have
55.
included introduction of corporate planning in all ministries and agencies, installation of Financial
Management Information System (FMIS), and strengthening of human resource management. A customer

17

service improvement program was also launched in 25 agencies. Those initiatives have improved
govermnent planning capacity and control over budget execution, and created greater client service
awareness. Under the on-going Public Sector Modernization Project (see below), these reforms are being
consolidated and deepened, including, inter alia, further strengthening of the link between corporate
planning and program budgeting, and developing of second-generation versions of the financial management
information and human resource management systems.
56.
Under a comprehensive reform of tax departments initiated in 1994, tax departments have been reorganized along functional lines. The enforcement capacity of the tax administration has been enhanced
through legal changes and provision of equipment and training. Integrated, full-service Revenue Centers
have been established to make tax compliance more convenient for taxpayers and staff have been trained in
customer service. An Integrated Computerized Tax Administration System (ICTAS) has been developed to
modernize information technology in tax administration. The ICTAS is currently undergoing testing, with
rollout expected shortly. The project has contributed, among other factors, to the increase in the tax to GDP
ratio in the last three years, and the ICTAS rollout is expected to further enhance revenue collection.
57.
Reforming public management and incentives. Ambitious efforts to introduce New Public
Management (NPM) in Jamaica's public sector, patterned on reforms in the UK and New Zealand, were
initiated in 1997, with support from the Bank under a Public Sector Modernization Project (PSMP).
Broadly, the initiative aims to restrict ministries to policy-making, monitoring, and evaluation, while
transferring service delivery responsibilities to subordinate operational entities with appropriate degrees of
autonomy (in financial, human resource, and operational matters) and accountability (bolstered by a formal
contractual framework). Implementation has advanced in two pilot ministries (Transport and Works, and
Land and Environment) and 17 entities (departments, statutory bodies, or public companies) slated for
conversion into 10 executive agencies. Initial results from four executive agencies that have been in
operation since April 1999 are promising, indicating inter alia heightened focus on performance targets,
increased revenue generation and reduced financial dependence on the central budget, and greater focus on
customer convenience and demand.
58.
The Government has also been responding to the increasing demand from civil society for more
transparent and participatory decision-making. For example, civil society members are often invited to
participate in Cabinet Committee meetings. In addition, the National Planning Council chaired by the
Finance Minister has representation from a broad cross-section of civil society, including representatives of
trade unions, NGOs, the private sector, and academia.
59.
Despite the impressive overall progress to date, implementation of a significant portion of the public
sector reform agenda-including completion of the pilot NPM reforms and their extension-still lies ahead.
However, realizing that the gains to Jamaica of a more transparent, efficient and effective public sector,
particularly in the present environment of severe resource constraints, are potentially very significant,
commitment to the reforms has been demonstrated at the senior-most level of Government.
D. Ensuring Sustainable Development
60.
Generating synergy in the environment-economy relationship. Recognizing the Jamaican
economy's dependence on natural resources, the Government is committed to advancing the creation of a
framework for the sustainable use of the natural resource base. The dominant economic activities-coastal
tourism, bauxite mining, and agriculture-are supported by natural assets, but they also contribute to
environmental degradation. The inter-connected nature of the island's ecosystems also means that economic
activities without the necessary environmental safeguards can have far-reaching external effects on multiple
ecosystems. Policies to promote economic growth can also pose significant environmental challenges.
61.
In general, fiscal policies have a direct effect on the environment and so can be used effectively to
promote protection of the natural resource base while generating revenue to offset the cost of protection. The
Government has expressed its commitment to promote environmental economic policies based on the
market-based "polluter pays" principle. On the whole, removal of subsidies to producers and consumers has
a positive impact on the environment. The challenge for the Government is to ensure adequate budgetary

18
allocations for environmental protection in the present climate of fiscal constraints and to encourage efficient
and effective use of such allocations.
62.
Stimulating sustainable agricultural growth. Given that almost three-fourths of the poor live in
rural areas, the battle against poverty cannot be won without a sustainable agricultural/rural development
strategy. Key challenges facing the agricultural sector are its vulnerability to drought conditions, and high
costs/low productivity. Government policy focuses on implementation of its National Master Irrigation Plan,
generation and dissemination of improved technology (towards which the Government proposes a joint
agriculture research program with the private sector), improving credit availability, and supporting the
development of agro-industry. In terms of external trade issues, while Jamaica is likely to suffer some loss
in access owing to erosion of EU preferential arrangements for bananas and sugar, its main challenges
continue to be domestic, relating to lack of competitiveness in many sectors which have, for example, meant
that Jamaica's EU import quotas for bananas and sugar have not been fulfilled.
63.
Linking tourism and sustainable development. The Government has acknowledged the leading
contribution of tourism to national development (it presently contributes about 7.7 percent to GDP and
employs 7.6 percent of the labor force) and expressed its commitment to a sustainable tourism development
strategy. The sustainability of tourism depends on the following: careful management of the natural resources
on which the sector currently relies (sea, sun, and sand); diversification of the product, including greater
promotion of ecological and cultural attractions-resources that are the most fragile; and wider stakeholder
participation, including the poor, in the benefits of the sector, which the Government intends to promote.
64.
The environmental threats posed by tourism are well documented, including poor disposal of liquid
and solid waste, overcrowding in coastal zones and destruction of environmentally sensitive areas. Natural
resources on which tourism depends are also threatened by activities such as poor upland watershed
management and industrial pollution. Identifying these will help in determining appropriate policies for
protecting tourism-related natural assets, and in assessing polluters' incentives to pay for prevention of
damage. The Government is considering a variety of instruments to raise revenue for financing
environmental protection, including debt-for-heritage swaps, debt-for-nature swaps, an environmental tax,
tax incentives, and incentives for investment in environmentally sustainable technology in the tourist
industry.
65.
Improving disaster preparedness. Jamaica is susceptible to several types of natural hazards due to
its physiography and its location within an earthquake zone and hurricane belt. The natural hazards include
tropical low pressure systems, flooding, earthquakes, and landslides. Man-made hazards such as chemical
spills have been relatively localized and infrequent. The 1999-2002 Jamaica National Environmental Action
Plan (JANEAP) cited disaster management issues related to land use, climate change and sea level rise. Poor
land use practices such as cultivation and development on unsuitable slopes have led to soil erosion, which
has exacerbated the impact of natural phenomena such as hurricanes and flooding. As a small island
developing state with only a narrow coastal strip fringing a mountainous interior, Jamaica is especially
vulnerable to the threat of sea level rise associated with the present trends of rapid global warming. The
coastal zone on which the island is heavily dependent for settlement, tourism and fisheries, is at risk from
increased coastal erosion, and inundation during storm surges.
66.
The Government has identified in the JANEAP a number of disaster mitigation strategies. These
include: hazard mitigation; land and hazard mapping; earthquake hazard assessment; sea level rise
preparedness; possible continuation of vulnerability assessments, planning and capacity building activities as
undertaken through the Caribbean Planning for Adaptation to Global Climate Change (CPACC) project; and
an oil spill contingency plan.
IV. WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR FY01-02
67.
The development agenda outlined in Section III provides an organizing framework to advance the
short to medium-term objectives articulated by the Government. Based on this agenda, and given the context
of the fiscal and financial sector difficulties, the improved dialogue, and the promising initiatives over the

19

last few months (see Sections I and II), the Bank proposes to initiate a fresh assistance program. This
program, which incorporates lessons learned from past Bank assistance to Jamaica, has been drawn up in
close collaboration with the Government, and with the benefit of consultations with civil society and major
development partners. The key elements of the Bank's FY01-02 assistance program that have emerged from
this process are: support for a bank restructuring and debt management program, consisting of two interlinked, fast-disbursing operations; support for a social sector program to assist with the reform of social
safety nets and secondary education; and analytical work on poverty as well as growth and competitiveness.
The program would support the immediate objective of preventing a reversal of recent gains in poverty
reduction, and helping to lay the foundations for sustainable growth in the future.
A. Bank Assistance in a Historical Context
68.
The last (March 1993) CAS focused on: (i) consolidating macroeconomic stabilization;
(ii) increasing public sector efficiency by refocusing public expenditures and strengthening staff and pay in
key ministries; (iii) encouraging export-oriented private production through provision of supporting
infrastructure and appropriate regulatory reform; and (iv) improving the delivery of social services by
stepping up implementation of externally funded projects. The CAS was cautiously optimistic, noting
substantial progress in the creation of a policy framework for growth, but pointing out the lack of adequate
private investment. During 1993-96, progress was achieved in these areas under an IMF Extended Fund
Facility and a Bank private sector development loan as well as education, energy and public sector reform
projects. Portfolio implementation was aided by the establishment of a Bank country office in Kingston in
late 1993.
69.
With the advent of financial sector troubles in mid-1996 and owing in part to the lack of a shared
vision on the overall policy framework to tackle financial distress, the level of Bank activity in Jamaica
declined. No new operations were approved by the Bank after September 1996. Overall, the average annual
level of new commitments between FY93 (beginning with the CAS) and FY97 amounted to US$51 million
against an expectation of about US$100 million.
70.
A Country Assistance Note (CAN), prepared by the Operations Evaluation Department (OED) in
December 1998, pointed out that the outcome of the Bank's assistance program to Jamaica has on the whole
been unsatisfactory, and below the average outcome for Bank projects (see Box 3). The CAN suggested that
Box 3: OED'sCountryAssistanceNote
The CountryAssistanceNote (CAN) provideda long-termpespective on the experienceof the Bank's assistanceto
Jamaica. The CAN noted that since 1965,the Bank had lent US1.3 billionfor 62 projectsto Jamaica. Of these, fiftyone projects had been rated by OEt), and ranked low in terms of all three indicators-outcome, sustainabilityand
institutionaldevelopmentimpact-compared to averagesfor both the LACregion and the Bank as a whole. Less than
half of adjustmentlending (whichmade up nearly 40 percent of the total),and about half of investmentlending,were
given satisitctoryoutcomeratings. Loansfortechnicalassistanceand administrativerefom alsoperformedpoorly.
The CAN noted that adjustmnent
programs did not ensure adequate fiscal adjustmentad istead relied on extemal
borrowing,entailinga sharp incease in Jamaica's externalpublic debt and debt service payments,and in the Bank's
exposure. Investmentlendingfor water supply and sanitation, education,power, and mining sectors was generally
considered satisfictory in design, while lending for population,health, and urban developmentwas found to be
unsatisfctory. Ambitiousdesignof projectsthat was not consistentwith local implementationcapacity,and insufficient
attentionto risks in the fundingand managementof projectswere identifiedas the leadingcauses for the low success
rate. Shortagesof counterpartfunds also hamperedproject implementation. Economicand sector work in the l 990s
respondedto a growingpreferencefor shortand focusedpieces (seeAnnex B4 for a swumaryof recentwork).
the outcome could be improved if a few key lessons were taken on board. These lessons-adopted in this
CAS-also emerged from implementation of the 1993 CAS and, more recently, from the portfolio
management and project completion reports:

20
*

*

*

Given the history of adjustment in Jamaica, the CAS should be based on more intensive participation
involving the Jamaican authorities as well as civil society, to ensure country "ownership" of Banksupported operations (see Box 4).
Measures designed to support macroeconomic stability and financial sector restructuring must be a
critical element of any future lending strategy, given the critical role of macro-financial sector reforms in
fostering resumption of growth. Labor market reforms, including the wage-setting mechanism in the civil
service, is also considered crucial to break the vicious cycle of inflation followed by large wage
increases, and approaches to such reforms must form part of the dialogue between Jamaica and the Bank.
Future lending programs should make special efforts to strengthen institutions and human resources and,
in the meantime, project design in all sectors should be scaled to existing capacity.

Box4: CAS CosltatinsaEvvggProcess
e CANpointedout that in r
ibased
on more
intensiveparticipationby theJainathiteanciisoit.Nwihtnngtelkofahrd
vision on
some key aspects of macro-fincl
picora
periot
imthe
B
iaguwthetiti
remained
good, in particularat the se
lv
natihon, te a
uicf
Center, lceine
University
of the West Indiescampusnare
hou,has
helped disseminateinfomatio and servedin the pastas a meetingplace to discuss economicissues wth social and
environmentalNGOs.
In the specific task of preparingtis CA, a broa range of views in Jamaicawas
souht
Governmenspific
inptfrtheepaihis
CASi
hntsbie
e
(2000-02). tled dions
onthe daft Swrheld
i mieber
2000
Miit
Planning, the PlanninJ
undertakenwith conce e ii ~e tameigcardb
h aie
ertr
nlt
etme
keyelementsoftheproposeCAS
smeetlb
at
andmultpta}
the same time. Finally consultatonswe held wth a
t o cil ot,al
in t
sessionsin MontegoByand i so hr notieo
h rpsdBn
sitnesrtg
discussed. 0,verall,partici
reservation about theproed
al an
nil sort
t
tis CAS.

n te part oth
r S y
ofnance and
00
eaaey
encies atabout
S
at two
i rsne
and
was no

One of the objectivesof this CAS is to promot
oaeranmindepth
diloguewicvsci
makingit part
of a regla process rather t
a one-ofevent sict
in
on
E4hASpre
on. C
i
-deph
consultation,for whichpaipantsattSepte
sie
xpid
srog spprtld
al
p deepen
consensus on the overall de
p
ada.
B. Bank Assistance in the Context of Overall Support for Jamaica's Development Agenda
71.
Development partners' activities. Apart from the United Nations system, there are some thirteen
development partners currently supporting Jamaica's development agenda. Table 4 indicates the areas where
various bilateral and multilateral agencies are active in Jamaica. The Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB), the European Union (EU), the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the United
States Agency for International Development (USAID), the UK Department for International Development
(DFID) and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) have large and comprehensive assistance programs in
the country.
72.
World Bank activities. The Bank's recent lending and non-lending activities are summarized in
Annexes B4 and B8. Since early 1993, the Bank has approved eight projects, including one fast-disbursing
loan for private sector development. The six currently active projects focus on making the public sector
more effective (two loans), improving access to and quality of education (two loans), enhancing exports and
private investment (one), and supporting a social investment fund (one). No projects have been approved
since 1996. The quality of the portfolio, which was poor through much of the 1990s, was turned around in
FY00 (see Box 5). In addition to lending, recent Bank analytical and advisory activities (AAA) has focused
on the social sectors, leaving much of the macroeconomic work to the IMF (with whom the Bank coordinates
closely). Public expenditure analysis includes a Public Expenditure Review (1996), followed by a review of

21

secondary education (1999) and, more recently, a Social Sector Expenditure Review (2000). Other ongoing
social sector studies include an assessment of social assistance programs, and an analysis of youth at risk.
Crime issues were analyzed in the Urban Poverty and Violence study (1997).
Table 4: Jamaica's Development Partners and their Major Areas of Activity

.2

Specific Interventions
Financial Sector Reform
Power Sector Reform
Telecommunications Reforms
Water and Sanitation Reform
National Highways
Privatization of Ports
Competition Laws and Competitiveness
Microenterprises, SMEs
Trade Liberalization
Agricultural Sector reform
Energy
Standards
Basic Education
Prima Education
Secondary and Tertiary Education
Skills Training
Health Sector Reform
Health Services Provision
AIDS Prevention and Treatment
Land Management
Justice System
-Social Safety Nets and their Reform
Emergency Reconstruction
Integrated Financial Management

Of which:
Budget Management and Budget Support
0
Tax Administration
o 2c c 53 > Public Sector Modemization
et Society/Electoral Reform
2 E , Civil
Participation
E2>'> > o
Decentralization Strategy
-Urban Strategy
vQ

Development Partners
IDB, IMF, CDB, IBRD
IDB, IFC, NIGA
EU, CIDA, USAID
EU, CDB, JBIC, IDB
EU, IDB, KFED, JBIC
IDB, EU
CIDA, EU, USAID, IBRD
CIDA, USAID, EU, UNDP, IDB
IDB
EU, CDB, IDB
GERMANY
CIDA, IDB/MIF
UNICEF, CIDA, CDB, DFID
IDB, USAID, DFID
DFID, NET, IDB, EU, IBRD
GERMANY, JICA, UNDP, IDB, EU
IDB, EU, PAHO, DFID
EU, USAID, GERMANY, NET, JICA
USAID, GERMANY, NET, CIDA, UNDP, IDB, IBRD
1DB
CIDA, IDB, DFID
IDB, CDB, EU, DFID, IBRD
CDB
IDB, IBRD

EU, IBRD
IBRD
EU, DFID, UNDP, CIDA, IBRD
EU, CIDA, UNDP
DFID
IDB, CIDA, UNDP, UNICEF
DFID, USAID

Environmental Policy Reform

CIDA, USAID, GEF, IDB, UNDP

Watershed Management

EU, CIDA, UNDP, IDB, USAID

Rural Roads
Agricultural Support and Production
Sewerage - Water

EU
CDB, IDB, EU, JICA
JBIC, CHINA, IDB, GERMANY,

EU, USAID

Selectivity will be sharpened. While the Bank's assistance program in the past has not been very
73.
wide-ranging, selectivity will be sharpened under the present CAS, guided by the following principles:
Focus on the core mandate of poverty reduction, through support for safety net mechanisms and the
planned reforms of secondary education to help improve the future of Jamaica's youth, as well as by
helping to foster renewed growth to safeguard recent poverty gains.
* Focus on areas of comparative advantage, such as the financial sector, the education sector, and social
safety nets, where the Bank possesses cross-country experience and/or accumulated knowledge and
involvement in Jamaica.
* Focus on complenentarity and coordination with bilateral and multilateral agencies. For example,
Bank staff will continue relying in large measure on IMF staff macroeconomic monitoring and
assessments, focusing principally on the social and structural policy agenda. Where there are common
areas of intervention, such as with the IDB, CDB and IMF in the financial sector, close coordination will
*

22
continue so as to ensure complementary specialization of focus. And in areas that are critical to
Jamaica's development agenda but where other partners are already active (such as agriculture/rural
development and the justice system where, among others, IDB, CDB, EU, DFID and CIDA have ongoing or planned assistance initiatives), the Bank will rely largely on the partners.

Box 5: Pro-active Efforts Tintr Around the Porflio

of IBR

j

Throughmuch of the 1990;, severalprojes in the Bank'sportfolio expeienced
lficuties.
Between FY93 and
FY99,there wereon averagetwo probl projectsin the orio.
Disbursements F
n
fell to 14 and I8 percentof the
undisbursedamount at the begnning of the fiscal year. In 1999, facd with
imletatn
problemsas wellas severe
macoeconomicconstraints,
the GoBeameniwiththe assistanceofBnk sftff
lup
the portfolio,proceedingwith
closure of projectssuch as pow whihadseebusementags,
adtaingpro-ctivemasto
improvethe performanc of
problemprojects. Owingto theseeff,
e
is now
t dibursementratio reachinga high o
56 percent in FY00 (althought
s temp
s
t
t a n-o
up of the potio,
n is due to a substanial
disbusement on the energySe
der
pr
pror to its cl
At the s
t,
e lio is now much smallerthan
at any timein recentyears, and hb
st
y dlining sinceFY, ith impl
onofine projecs wit net comitments o
US$250million,to six prjects wh U
m
in n commitmet in 00
selt
Fiscalyear
Projets(#)
Net CommitmentAmount(Sm)
ProjectsatRisk( )
ActualProblemProjects(#)
Potential ProblemProjectse
ComnitmtentatRisk($m)
Realism Index (%)1
ProactivityIndex(%9
Disbursement Ratio3
AverageProjec Age (years)

n
1993
12
345
3
1
2
60
33.3
NA

22.0
3.9

torsf
1994
13
369
4
3
1
86
75.0
NA
16.5
3.8

Bank Portfoliot
199
10
332
4
3
1
150
75.0
NA

13.4
40

rfrmae

Y93-FYOI

1996
8
238
3

1997
9
250

2

1

1
97
66.7

NA
21.6

149
2 0
100

25.7

!3.829

198
7
217
3
2

199
7
217

121

117
66.7
50

667
0
14.2
3.6

2000
6
157

3
2

0
I
28
0

20014
6
157
0
0
0
0
100

100
55.7

100

18.0
4.6

5.2

5.5

-

Source. WorldBankBusinessWarehouse
1IRealismIndex:Measuresthe ratWof acu probler projectsto totalactua and potentialproblemprojects.
2/ ProaiVIt indx: Measuresthe proportionof project tedas actualproblemprojec tweve mothsearhich
havebeenupgraded,restructre
su
. or pllyor
fycande
Inorderto avelOpercetpactivity,ationrmubetakenon
ap
.
3/ DisbursementRatio:MeasuresIBRDd i
m initlscalyear(JlyJun
30)to ihe
i
e
at thin
of
e fiscal
year.
4/As ofOctober 20,2000

C. Proposed World Bank Assistance Program for FYO1-02
74.
As noted earlier, this is the Bank's first CAS since 1993. It is being processed in the wake of several
positive developments in Jamaica and improvement in the quality of the macroeconomic and structural
policy dialogue between the authorities and the IFIs. The CAS proposes a highly focused program for
Jamaica, based on the foregoing selectivity principles and Jamaica's development needs.
75.
Base-case Scenario. On the assumption that implementation of the macroeconomic and financial
sector restructuring program is on track, and that Bank portfolio implementation remains satisfactory, the
Bank would undertake a lending program of US$220 million over FYOI-02, of which US$150 million would
be fast-disbursing assistance in support of financial sector rehabilitation and the remainder (US$70 million)
in support of the social sectors. The program as a whole will consist of the following:

(i)
Bank Restructuring and Debt Management Program As a first step, creating the preconditions for
growth and thereby preventing reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction calls for maintaining and
consolidating macroeconomic stability and pursuing financial sector restructuring. The proposal to provide
US$150 million in support of a bank restructuring and debt management program will complement support

23
from the IDB (US$150million)and the CDB (US$25million),with appropriatespecializationand division
of labor among the three institutions as well as close coordinationwith the IMF. Given the need for
flexibilityin response,Bank supportwould take the form of two successiveoperations(US$75 million in
financial
each of FY01 and FY02, respectively,9-12 months apart), nestedwithinthe overall progranmmatic
(FINSAC)
sector
of
public
sectorreformframework.The focusof the programwillbe on: (a) the resolution
liabilities accumulatedin the wake of intervention;(b) restructuringand divestmentof affected financial
strengtheningto reducethe chancesof recurrenceof crisis.
institutions;and (c) regulatory/supervisory
Social Program. Jamaica's youth representone of the most vulnerablegroupsin society. Tackling
(ii)
this youth-at-risk problem demands a multi-dimensionalresponse at different levels. Key elements
underlyingyouth vulnerabilityinclude weaknessesin early childhooddevelopment,low quality of and/or
access to primary and secondary education,and shortcomingsin social protection mechanismsthat can
benefit youth. In FY01-02, the Bank proposes to provide support for a social program focused on
strengtheningsafety nets (US$35million)and reformingsecondaryeducation(US$35 million). On safety
nets, the proposedSocial SafetyNet ReformProject(FY01) will likely focus on supportinga consolidation
of and increasein allocationfor major income transferprograms,developmentof targeting and monitoring
mechanismsand associatedinstitutionalstrengtheningand capacitybuilding, and a strengtheningof early
childhooddevelopmentinitiatives. Close coordinationis being maintainedwith the IDB, CDB,EU, CIDA,
DFID, UNICEFand UNDPto ensurethat complementaryprogramsreceivefundingand technicalassistance.
A second Reform of SecondaryEducation(ROSE II) project, plannedfor FY02, is intended to focus on
upper secondaryeducation while consolidatinggains already achieved under the ROSE project. It will
support enhancementof quality and efficiencyand increased access, by strengtheningteacher skills and
incentives,settingstandards,and reformingeducationfinance. Severalotherdevelopmentpartnersare active
in basic and primaryeducation,as wellas in secondaryand tertiaryeducation(see Table 4).
(iii)

Targeted Analytical and Advisory Activities. Aside from analytical work that is undertaken as part

of project preparation,stand-aloneanalyticaland advisoryactivities(AAA)would be undertakento deepen
the understandingof critical aspects of the Jamaicaneconomy,and provide the foundationsfor the policy
dialogue and the future lendingprogram. The ongoingyouth-at-riskreview as well as the regional gender
review would increase understanding of these critical areas as well as present policy options to the
authorities. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and a Country Procurement
AssessmentReview (CPAR) have been prepared in draft form and will shortly be discussed with the
authoritiesin order to inform on-goingBank project support for public sector reform (see Section IV.E).
New AAA is expectedto focuson two broad areas:
* The first concerns economicgrowth, with special attention to the analysis of the main sources of
growth, including the investmentpuzzle and estimating the size and growth of the underground
economy (see Box 2), productivity and competitivenessissues, structural constraints to growth
(including,in particular,labormarket and wage-settingissues),and the public policy responsesneeded
to foster incomeand employmentgrowth. This work is likelyto take the form of a Socialand Structural
Review,and would be initiatedin the secondhalf of FY01.
* The second area, likely to be initiated in FY02, concernspoverty and related social ills, with special
attentionto an understandingof recent povertytrends and linkageswith growth(see Box 1), and, more
broadly,to the causes and consequencesof povertyand social exclusion,and appropriatepublic policy
responses.
While maintainingthe overall thrust summarizedin Table 5, the timing or relative emphasisof new AAA
could be adjusted in line with evolvingGovernmentpriorities. In developingthis work program,the Bank
will activelyseek to collaboratewith other developmentpartnersand Jamaicaninstitutions.
Regional Initiatives. In additionto its Jamaica-specificprogram,the Bank will continueto organize
(v)
regional policy platforms in which Jamaica is an active participant, such as the Regional HIV/AIDS
Conferenceof September2000 and the biennialCaribbeanGroupfor Cooperationin EconomicDevelopment
(CGCED). Followingthe SeptemberH[V/AIDSConference,Bank Managementannouncedits intentionto
requestBoardapprovalfor US$85-100millionin loans and creditsfor HIV/AIDSprogramsin the Caribbean
region. Jamaica,amongothercountriesin the Region,is expectedto benefit from this initiative. The project

24

will help implement preventive measures to limit the epidemic and build capacity to fight against it. It would
build upon existing programs in the Caribbean and support the Caribbean Regional Strategic Plan of Action
for WV/AIDS put forth by the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). As organizer and chair of the CGCED,
the Bank works closely with Governments and development partners in the Caribbean to ensure that issues of
importance to the Region's development are regularly reviewed and discussed. Such issues have included
trade liberalization, public sector modernization, private sector development, financial sector development,
labor market impediments, opportunities and constraints in tourism development, environmental protection,
erosion of EU preferential trade arrangements in banana and sugar, and implications of NAFTA for
Caribbean exports. The June 2000 CGCED meeting in Washington, DC focused on a 20-year development
vision and agenda for the Caribbean, with a detailed focus on preventing HIV-AIDS, enhancing governance,
diversifying risk and mitigating natural disasters. The private sector and civil society are also represented in
the CGCED discussions. Finally, the Bank is also exploring with several Caribbean countries the possibility
of a more integrated regional approach to natural resource management in connection with the tourism
industry. This approach would involve identifying priority areas for environmental protection (with
community involvement) including rich biodiversity areas with potential for eco-tourism. In Jamaica, the
Bank has initiated discussions with the Government on the preparation of such a project (Cockpit Country
Conservation Project) with funding from the Global Environmental Facility.
76.
Bank Portfolio Evolution under the Base-case Lending Program. Assuming that projects under
implementation close as scheduled and that two new operations are delivered in each of FY01 and FY02,
base-case deliveries would lead to three projects under implementation at the start of FY02.12 At the start of
FY03, there would be 2-3 projects in the active portfolio.13 The base case lending program, if fully
implemented, will increase the Bank's exposure to Jamaica but still keep it within manageable limits (see
Section IV.E below).
77.
Low-Case Assistance Scenario. The base-case assistance scenario is, in the Bank's judgement, the
most likely scenario to materialize. However, contingency plans need to be in place should the framework
for base-case lending not be realized. The low-case scenario is based on less-than-satisfactory progress in
specific respects, for which two triggers have been identified. The first is a situation where the
macroeconomic framework (including policy effort) is judged by the Bank to be unsatisfactory. In making
such a judgement, the Bank would be guided primarily by IMF views on the implementation of the SMP.
Indicators to be tracked by the Bank to monitor macroeconomic developments include the primary balance
and overall balance of the central government, as well as the public sector debt-to-GDP ratio, although any
judgement on the adequacy of the macroeconomic framework would clearly need to be a holistic one that is
arrived at in close consultation with IMF staff. The second is a situation where key actions under the bank
restructuring and debt management program (BRDP) are not taken, or where progress is insufficient to
complete the Govermnent's financial restructuring program.
78.
The low-case lending program is based on either of these two triggers materializing, but Bank
project implementation continuing to remain satisfactory. However, even if the low case occurs, it would be
triggered only after Board presentation of the first phase of support for the bank restructuring and debt
management program, commitments and disbursements from which would already have amounted to US$75
million. In light of this, the low-case lending program for FY0 I-02 would be defined as the first phase of the
BRDP (US$75 million) along with the social safety net reform project (US$35 million). Under the low-case
lending program, the second phase of the BRDP would not be processed, and the reform of secondary
education would be delayed, in order to cap new commitments over FY01-02 at about US$110 million. In

12 The Reformof SecondaryEducation(ROSE1) andthe Tax Administration
Reform(TAXARP)projectswill closeon December
31, 2000. TheJamaicaSocialInvestmentFundand the PrivateInvestmentand ExportDevelopmentprojectswill closeon March31,
2001and June30, 2001,respectively.The firstphaseof supportfor the BRDPwouldlikewisecloseon June 30, 2001.
13 The two remainingprojects in the currentlyactive portfolio,the Jamaica Student Loan and Public Sector Modernization
projects,will close on June 30, 2002. The exactnumberof projectsin the activeportfolioat the start of FY03 woulddependon the
closingdate of the secondphaseof supportfor the BRDP.

25

the unlikely event of significant deterioration in the implementation of Bank projects or in the quality of the
social sector dialogue with the Government, the Bank would need to reconsider even this low-case lending
scenario.
79.
The low-case scenario would materialize in the event that the macroeconomic or financial sector
program is off-track (see Table 5). Should this happen, AAA is likely to be stepped up (as compared with
the base-case AAA), to understand better what went wrong (i.e., why the low case occurred), with the
immediate focus likely to be on poverty monitoring and sources of growth. In effect, Bank effort would be
shifted from lending preparation to AAA.

Table5: BankAssistanceScenarios,FYO1-02
Base Case

Low Case

Lending Strategy

Lendingfor financialsectorand socialsectors
(socialsafetynets and secondaryeducation)
programs,and preparingfor follow-up
operations.

Focuslendingon supportfor social safetynet
reform,and preparefor secondaryeducation
reformoperation.

Lending

US$220million(includingUS$150millionfastdisbursing).

No lendinginFY02(commitmentcappedat
US$110million).

Triggers

1. Macroeconomicframework:consistentwith
the authorities'programoutlinedin the SMP.

1. Macroeconomicframework:unsatisfactory
macroeconomic
framework,includingpolicy
effort(implementation
of the SMP off-track).

2. Financialsectorprogram:on-track
implementation.

2. Financialsectorprogram:lack of progressin
key areassuch as resolutionof NCB and Life of
Jamaicaor in strengtheningthe regulatory
regimefor the financialsector.

3. Portfoliomanagement:satisfactory.

3. Portfoliomanagement:satisfactory.

Analyticaland Advisory
Activities

Activitieswill coversocialand structural
policies(growth,competitiveness,labor
markets),in-depthanalysisof poverty, youthat
risk,procurementand financialmanagement,and
reviewof countryportfolioperformance.

Activitiesunderthe basecase,especiallyin
relationto povertyand growthand
competitiveness,
will be acceleratedand
broadenedin scope.

OtherProspective
Activities

Supportfor RegionalHIV/AIDSpreventionand
mitigationprogram;GEF-fundedsupportfor
environmentalmanagementand conservation.

As underthe BaseCase.

80.
Apart from IBRD, the World Bank Group's two other constituents have also played a role in
Jamaica. While this role has been limited owing to lack of sustained market growth, increased private sector
interest in the country (which stands a good chance of materializing if the authorities' economic program
proceeds on track) could see a substantial increase in IFC and MIGA activity, as outlined below.
81.
International Finance Corporation (IFC). Given the difficult macroeconomic conditions and
constraints on private investment during the past several years, IFC's activity in Jamaica has been limited.
An IFC investment in an independent power producer (US$22 million in debt and US$2 million in equity)
was approved in FY95, of which US$16.8 million remains outstanding. This was complemented by
additional support for the project in FY97, financed by a participating bank in the form of a US$45 million
"B" loan. Another IFC investment of US$8 million, approved in FY93, was pre-paid in FY00 when the
company was sold. In addition, IFC has had discussions with several financial institutions regarding credit
lines and other transactions. Unfortunately, owing to the difficulties in the financial sector, no transactions
have materialized. IFC continues to look for opportunities in Jamaica and is currently reviewing a possible
investment in the telecommunications sector. In addition, Jamaica is one of the twelve Caribbean countries

26
participating in a joint IFC-The Bank of Nova Scotia US$50 million facility to provide financing to small
and medium-sized export-oriented enterprises undertaking greenfield, expansion and restructuring projects.
82.
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA). Jamaica became a member of MIGA in
1988. Since 1992, MIGA has issued 14 contracts of guarantee, mostly in Jamaica's power sector, for a total
issued amount of US$151 million. MIGA's outstanding portfolio consists of 12 contracts of guarantee with
US$97.3 million in gross exposure, of which US$92 million constitutes net exposure. The current exposure
is well below the guarantee limit for Jamaica, which is of the order of US$620 million, and could be even
higher, since MIGA could raise substantial additional capacity in the private market through its Cooperative
Underwriting Program (CUP) and facultative reinsurance. MIGA's objectives in the medium term are to
diversify its portfolio while supporting private sector development along the CAS objectives, in particular the
rehabilitation of the banking sector.
D. Country Program Monitoring
83.
By far the largest influence on Jamaica's development progress will be the Government's own
policies and actions, rather than the precise volume and composition of Bank support. Nevertheless, a priori
expectations are that if the CAS base-case lending scenario is implemented within the context of a sound
macroeconomic framework and on-track implementation of structural and institutional reforms (Sections II
and III), Jamaica would witness gradual progress towards growth, employment generation, and consolidating
gains in poverty reduction. On the other hand, were the low-case Bank lending scenario to be triggered, the
underlying policy environment within which this occurred would be less conducive to achieving the
development goals. There could be short-run deviations from these linkages, but it is highly unlikely, for
example, that sustained growth and poverty reduction would be possible without the right enabling
environment.
84.
Progress in relation to CAS objectives, assuming that the base-case lending scenario is implemented,
will be measured through Country Development Indicators (see Table 6) and Bank Program Performance
Indicators over the next two years. An assessment of progress, especially the analysis of the link between
Bank support and country performance indicators, will also feed into the preparation of the next CAS.
Table 6: Proposed CAS Benchmarks, 1999-2002
1999
KeyPoverty Indicators
PovertyHeadcountRatio(% estimates,JSLC)
PovertyGap

16.9
4.4

2000
16.0
4.0

2002
16.0
4.0

LeadingProeressIndicators
Indicators associated withfinancial sector resolution and restoration of growth

Increasein growthrate of per capitaGDPfromnegativerates in recentyears to 0.7 percentin 2000/01and 1.7
percentin 2001/02.
Declinein total debt (net of intra-publicdebt)to GDPratio from 131percentof GDPin April 2000to 123
percentof GDPby April 2001 and 114percentof GDPby April 2002.
Social Indicators associated withpoverty reduction

Increasein the percentageof gradenine secondaryschoolgraduateshavinga place in gradeten from under80
percentin 1999to near 100 percentby 2002.

Country Development Indicators
*

Key indicators ofpoverty alleviation. Given the already low headcount ratio, fiurtherdeclines in poverty
are expected to be slow, especially given that growth recovery is likely to be gradual. The immediate

27
development challenge (see Section I.C) will be to prevent reversal of the recent gains in poverty
reduction. Accordingly, the benchmarks for this CAS will be a 2002 poverty ratio of about 16 percent,
and a poverty gap index of around 4 percent. Given that even the 2001 poverty data will not be available
until about September 2002, the preparation of the next CAS for the period July 2002 and beyond will
have to rely on monitoring some of the factors normally associated with poverty reduction (at least in the
medium to long term), such as growth of per capita income. Qualitative aspects such as progress in the
definition and implementation of reform measures in safety nets, which affect measured poverty, will
also be tracked. The Bank will monitor these indicators together with the Government.
*

Indicators associated with thefinancial sector and restoration of growth. Progress toward the resolution
of the remaining financial sector problems and the restoration of growth will be closely monitored.
Indicators will be measures of macroeconomic improvement, such as the growth rate of per capita GDP
and decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio (net of intra-public sector debt). Additional indicators more directly
related to progress in financial sector restructuring are incorporated in the accompanying bank
restructuring and debt management program. These indicators will be monitored by the Bank in
cooperation with the IMF, who will undertake monitoring on a regular basis until end-March 2002 in the
context of the SMP.

* Non-income dimensions ofpoverty. One indicator to be tracked is enrollment in secondary education, as
per government goals. Every child that successfully completes grade nine is expected to have a place in
grade ten (currently, this ratio is under 80 percent). This will also be a monitoring indicator under the
secondary education project. Increases in such enrolment are likely to improve income distribution over
the medium term. 14
Bank Program Performance Indicators

-

Portfolio management. Close attention will be paid to Realism and Pro-activity indices as well as the
Quality Assurance Group's (QAG) "at risk" flags, which draw special attention to project-specific
financial management and procurement problems, including availability of counterparts funds, use of
special accounts, slow disbursements, and timeliness and quality of audit reports. In the event that a
project should become a "potential problem" (i.e., possess three or more QAG flags), Bank staff will
increase supervision intensity to mitigate implementation risks. Disbursement rates will be carefully
monitored, and steps taken to ensure continued improvements. More generally, Bank self-evaluation
will be strengthened through quarterly reviews of portfolio performance with the support of the Jamaica
country office. The CFAA and CPAR exercises will facilitate project implementation.

* Project effectiveness. Key success indicators for each of the projects in the portfolio during the next two
years will be monitored and linked in a broader way to the country development agenda, following the
approach of programmatic support which this CAS proposes to adopt.
E. Bank Exposure, Financial Management and Procurement, and Managing Risks
85.
World Bank Exposure to Jamaica. Bank exposure to Jamaica has declined significantly in recent
years as a result of reduced-and, over the past four years, absence of-new lending. As of end-March
2000, Jamaica's debt outstanding and disbursed (DOD) to the Bank was US$383 million,15 or 12.1 percent of
Jamaica's total public and publicly-guaranteed (PPG) external debt of US$3.2 billion (about 46 percent of
GDP). A furhier US$54 million was undisbursed under six on-going Bank projects. Over the past ten years,
net flows to Jamaica from the Bank have averaged a negative US$30 million annually, and net transfers a
negative US$73 million annually.
14
Otherindicatorssuch as infantmortalityare not being trackedsince there is no recent data on this. In early childhood(3-5
years),the enrolmentis alreadyalmost95 percent,and near 100percentin primaryeducation.
15

US$353millionat end-September2000.

28

86.
Against the backdrop of the macroeconomic outlook under the authorities' program (see Table 3),
the proposed base case Bank lending program for Jamaica in FY01-02 (US$220 million) would entail only a
moderate increase in Bank exposure, given that principal repayments due on existing Bank loans average
almost US$50 million annually over the next five years. Even under relatively optimistic disbursement
assumptions (see footnote 18), the proposed lending program would see Jamaica's debt outstanding and
disbursed to the Bank increase to US$422 million (12.4 percent of the projected external public and publiclyguaranteed (PPG) debt stock) at end-March 2001, rising further to US$476 million (13.1 percent of the
projected external PPG debt stock) by end-March 2002 and stabilizing thereafter (see Table 7).
87.
In terms of the flow exposure indicators which the Bank typically tracks, over the next five years:
(i) debt service to the Bank as a ratio of exports of goods and services is projected to remain within the
2-3 percent range and even fall below 2 percent after 2001/02; and (ii) debt service to the Bank as a ratio of
total PPG external debt service is projected to remain within the 13-14 percent range.16 However, debt
service to preferred creditors as a ratio of total PPG external debt service payments due would remain high,
in the 36-38 percent range,17 over the medium term.
88.
In terms of overall external indebtedness, Jamaica's debt to GDP ratio places it around the median
for IBRD borrowers. However, Jamaica's total (internal plus external) debt to GDP is among the highest of
all IBRD borrowers, which limits its capacity to absorb additional shocks or pressures. Nevertheless, IBRD
exposure should remain manageable, even as Jamaica faces a high overall debt burden. Constitutionally,
debt servicing receives precedence over all expenditures on the budget, which means that creditors would get
paid even if other expenditures such as planned investments have to be curtailed.
Table 7: External Public and Publicly-Guaranteed Debt and Bank Exposure Indicators"
Base-case Bank lending scenario (Jamaican Fiscal Year)
Estimate

------

1999/2000 2000/01

-----------

Projection -------------------

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

Overall Indebtedness
PPGDOD/XGNFS
PPGDOD/GDP
PPGDS/XGNFS

94.0
46.0
17.9

94.4
47.2
15.7

95.3
47.6
16.4

85.0
42.9
26.1

80.2
40.9
13.9

75.2
38.5
12.5

IBRDexposure
IBRDDS/PPGDS
PreferredcreditorDS/PPGDS
IBRDDS/XGNFS
IBRDDOD (US$million)

12.5
32.1
2.2
383

13.7
38.0
2.1
422

12.9
37.5
2.1
476

7.6
22.3
2.0
476

13.4
37.9
1.9
472

13.4
36.0
1.7
470

89.
Financial Management and Procurement. Draft Country Financial Accountability Assessment
(CFAA) and Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) exercises have recently been completed and
16 With the exceptionof Jamaicanfiscal year 2002/03,when the ratio would dip to around 8 percent due to a concentrationof
repaymentson sovereignbonds.

17 Again, with the exception of a dip (to about 22 percent) in Jamaican fiscal year 2002/03.

The key assumptions underlying the exposure projections include: (i) new Bank commitments of US$110 million (of which
US$75 million fast-disbursing) per year in (Bank) FYO1-02, followed by US$75 million in new (investment) commitments in
FY03-05; (ii) fast-disbursing commitments to be disbursed in the same FY; (iii) 30 percent disbursement ratios for new investment_
commitments beginning in the FY following the commitment; (iv) interest and charges on new IBRD commitments at 8.7 percent;
and (v) projections of aggregate debt flows and stocks based on the authorities' baseline medium-term scenario outlined in Table 3.
18

29

will shortly be discussed with the Government. The CFAA analyzes the state of public sector budgeting,
accounting, financial reporting and auditing. It concludes that the overall structure of government fimancial
management is sound, especially in comparison with other Caribbean countries, and that accountability
procedures and practices are on balance sufficiently reliable for fast-disbursing lending from the bank to be
adequately administered. However, in spite of recent progress (partly through the implementation of Bankfinanced reform programs), some weaknesses remain. The CFAA makes several recommendations to
improve public sector financial management, some of which were based on prior diagnostic work carried out
by international firms. On procurement issues, the Government has made progress, as reflected in impending
finalization of its procurement policy manual and handbook of procurement procedures. However, a large
number of issues remain, seemingly more challenging than those on financial management. To address
these, the draft CPAR has made recommendations that can be implemented in the short term (including, for
example, using competitive bidding instead of direct invitations to approved contractors, and establishment
of a system for administrative appeal against the decisions of the National Contracts Commission) as well as
in the medium term. Many of the weaknesses that have been identified in both financial management and
procurement issues are being addressed in the on-going Public Sector Modernization Project (PSMP), and
efforts will be made to involve DFID and other agencies in addressing the remaining issues. In addition, the
Government is examining ways to implement the recommendations of a Strategic Review for strengthening
its accountability framework.
90.
Managing Risks. Jamaica is a politically open and stable democracy. The incumbent Government
was elected by a large majority in 1989, 1993 and 1997 and has broad support across the country and at the
local level. It has the political support needed to undertake far-reaching economic reforms. Unfortunately,
the last five years have been among the most challenging in independent Jamaica, and the risk of adverse
developments under which the macroeconomic context for the proposed Bank assistance program would
come under threat (with deteriorating debt-to-GDP ratios and negative growth) is significant. Key risks have
been highlighted in Section II.D. Such risks would be addressed along the lines described below:
External Risk Factors. Steps are being taken to increase Jamaica's resilience to such shocks, for
example by ensuring further reserve build-up under the SMP. If, in spite of this, the macroeconomic
situation were to deteriorate significantly, the Bank would need to work with the authorities and the IMF
to strengthen the macroeconomic framework, while ensuring that measures were being taken to protect
the poor. In such a context, the authorities would likely have little option but to seek enhanced support
from the IFIs.


Risks of Weak Domestic Response. Despite the steps taken by the Government to improve private
sector investment incentives, there are risks that the recovery will be slower than expected. Such risks,
and their potentially adverse consequences for the poor, would be mitigated by the Bank-assisted
strengthening of the safety net program, and through efforts to gain a better understanding of the
determinants of and structural constraints to growth, as well as of the links between growth and poverty,
and to work the public policy implications into the dialogue with Government. Were unfavorable
developments to materialize, the Bank would work closely with the Government as well as the IMF and
other development partners to track and alleviate repercussions on the poor and vulnerable and to
appropriately strengthen the policy stance.

*

Policy Risk Factors. At least three ways of mitigating risks of delays or setbacks in the implementation
of the authorities' program would be pursued. First, while it is difficult to predict policy reversal, the
Bank will continue to engage in close dialogue with both the Government and civil society to reduce the
chances of this happening, and encourage public announcements and debate on government reform
intentions. Second, given the lessons of the past, the planned configuration of Bank lending-based on
up-front and irreversible reform measures that are domestically "owned"-would help mitigate risks. In
particular, this approach would be followed in the proposed Bank support for the bank restructuring and
debt management program, which would take the form of two discrete, phased operations. Third, in the
unlikely event that reversal should occur, the Bank would continue to engage in dialogue and to,encourage debate, while deferring or discontinuing new lending as appropriate.

30

91.
Risk mitigation efforts notwithstanding, it is clear that the success of Jamaica's program cannot be
guaranteed. The Bank needs to weigh the reputational risk to which it will be subject if its technical and
financial support for Jamaica is associated with disappointing results against the potential costs to the country
of inadequate support (and the different type of reputational risk associated therewith). This CAS, while
cognizant of both, makes the case for resuming strong support. It recognizes that Jamaica has had a long
period of financial sector difficulties and economic recession. Serious social problems have taken root. To
combat these, the Government has shown resolve in maintaining a very tight and potentially unpopular fiscal
stance, and in defining a program for the resolution of financial sector problems. Under these circumstances,
this CAS seeks to respond to the encouraging reform steps already taken. It also maintains a shorter-thanusual two-year horizon, intended to enable a broadening and deepening of in-country consultations over the
next 18 months, as well as to continue studying and analyzing the evolving situation in order to best respond
to Jamaica's needs. Delay may be costly for Jamaica, and there is the real risk that the socio-economic
situation could get worse unless the Bank and other IFIs are able to extend timely assistance to the country.
The Bank will work closely with other bilateral and multilateral agencies in ensuring that complementarity in
activities is maintained and strengthened, and that the development impact of combined efforts is maximized.

REMARKS
V. CONCLUDING
92.
Past shortcomings in macro-financial policies and structural reforms have been costly and have
placed Jamaica in a vulnerable position. The Bank proposes a pragmatic and focused assistance program that
would re-engage the lending relationship between the Government and the Bank, and help the Government
restore economic growth by consolidating hard-earned macroeconomic stability, pursuing efforts to
restructure the financial sector, and strengthening mechanisms to protect the poor. Financial support is
focused financial sector resolution and on social protection and education. The lending program is selective
and prudent, and provides timely and much-needed assistance to Jamaica without compromising its debt
position or implementation capacity. Proposed non-lending services seek to improve the country's
understanding of poverty, growth, and competitiveness-related issues. The program also provides for a
broad-based in-country consultation process that would help the Government strengthen the national
consensus on development priorities. At the same time, the Bank is aware of the significant risks to which its
proposed assistance program is subject, and stands ready to re-assess it, should macroeconomic, structural,
and portfolio management conditions so warrant.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By: Sven Sandstrom

November 2, 2000

Jamaica at a glance
Latin LowerAmerica middle.
Jamaica & Carib. Income

POVERTYandSOCIAL
1999
Population,mid-year(millions)
US$)
GNPper capita(Atasmethod,
USSbillions)
GNP(Atlasmethod,

2.6
2,330
6.6

509
3,840

1,955

Annex A

diamond*
Development
Lifeexpectancy

2,094
1t200
2,513

Averageannual growth,1993-99
1.0
15

Population(%)
Laborforce(9%)

t.6
2.5

1.1
1.2

75
70
31
8
75
12
113

43
69
33
15
86
16
114
114
116

Most recentestirate (latestyearavailable,1993-99)

line)
poverty
belownational
Poverty(%of population
Urbanpopulation(9 of totalpopulation)
Lifeexpectancyat birth(years)
Inat mortality(per 1,000ivebirths)
Childmalnutrition(X of childrenunder5)
Accessto improvedwatersource(%of population)
age 15+)
Illiteracy(%of population
Grossprimaryenrollment(%of school-agepopulation)
Male
Female

16,9
s0
71
25
10
83
14
100
100
99

KEYECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
1979

1989

1998

1999

billions)
GDP (USS
Grossdomesticinvestment/GDP
Exportsof goodsandservices/GDP
Grossdornesti savings/GDP
Gross nationalsavings/GDP

2A
19.2
49.8
18.4
13.3

4.1
28.5
47.2
19.0
16.4

7.1
29.0
47.2
21.9
26.0

7.2
29.6
46.7
20.6
25.1

CurrentaccountbalancetGDP
Interestpayments/GDP
Totalextemaldebt/GDP
TotalexWnaldebt servicelexports
Presentvalueof externaldebt/GDP
Presentvalueof externaldebt/exports

-5.8
4.4
71.7
23.8
-.

-7.2
4.2
111.1
29.6

-3.0
2.4
58.6
15.0
53.5
106.5

-4.5
2.7
58.8
17.1

1999

1999-03

..

.

..

.-

..

Gross
primary
enrollment

GNP
per
capita

Accessto safewater
Jamaica

---Lower-middle-income group
:

ratlos*
Economic
T
rade

Domestc
Domestic
Savngs

Investment

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99

prowth)
annual
(average

199

-Jamaica
-- Lower-middle-income group

0.6
0.8
0.1

-0.5
0.1
7.9

0.0
-1.8
-1.1

2.5
1.7
4.0

1979

1989

1998

1999

6.9
42.7
159.6
50.4

7.1
29.8

Services

7.2
40.3
16.4
52.5

6.9
27.7
126
4
49.6

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Importsof goodsandservices

62.3
19.3
50.6

67.0
14.1
56.7

60.4
18.6
55.2

62.3
17.4
56.0

-15

1979-89 1989-99

1998

1999

Growthof exportsand Imports(%)

GDP
GNPpercapita
Exportsof goodsandservices

1.2
-0.6
4.0

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(96of GDPatm.p.)
Agriculture
Industry

Manufacturing

annual
growth)
(average

13.9
51.6

andGDP(%)
Growthof Investment
5
0

-5

95

9

.10

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

0.3
0.8
1.7
1.S

3.0
-0.2
-1.8
0.9

0.2
-1.4
-3.9
0.1

1.7
-0.1
-09
-0.1

Privateconsumption
Generalgovernmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Grossnationalproduct

3.5
5.2
-1.1
7.7
0.7

-0.4
-1.3
4.6
0.0
1.5

-7.7
11.0
-11.0
-4.8
0.9

3.2
-6.8
2.1
1.4
-1.0

-GDI

O GDP

40

30 20

10
.10
-20

94
-

Exports

_Imports

Note:1999dataare preliminaryestimates.
average.If dataare missing,the diamondwill
Thediamondsshowfourkey indicatorsin thecountry(inbold)comparedwith its income-group
beincomplete.

Annex A
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices

1979

1989

1998

1999

(% change)
Consumer prices
ImplicitGDPdeflator

28.7
16.6

23.8
12.6

8.1
6.8

6.3
7.9

Inflation(%)

r0

Government finance
( of GDP, includes current giants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance

eo
40

20
0

31.8
5.6

28.0
-4.7

1.2

-7.3

30.3
-2.4
-4.3

1989

1998

1999

1,000
475
69
1,874
160
274
565

1,551
588
83
43
2,561
280
293
516

1,535
672
48
44
2,719
328
429
472

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)

101
85

96
112

98
116

Terms of trade (1995=100)

118

85

85

Overall surplus/deficit

.

94

95

-G

96

97

DP deflator

98

e-

99

CPI

TRADE
1979
(US$

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)

millions)

Total exports (fob)
Alumina
Bauxite

Il

Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

3,500

3,000
2,s00

2,
1,
sSi
1,000
soo
o
93

94

9s

96

* Exports

97

98

99

* Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$millions)

1979

1989

1998

1999

Current account balanceto GDP (%)

Exportsofgoodsandservices
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1,165
1,198
-32

1,941
2,291
-350

3,353
3,925
-572

3,366
4,037
-671

o
-1 -*_
.2

Net income
Net current transfers

-187
80

-271
323

-283
638

-353
698

3.
4

Current account balance

-s

-139

-298

-217

-326

;Financing items (net)

-20

136

203

448

Changes in net reserves

159

161

14

-122

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millons)
Conversion rate (DEC, hcaU/USS)

..

..

1.8

5.7

700
36.9

801
40.1

1979

1989

1998

1999

1,705
127
0

4,560
650
0

4,026
410
0

4,039
355
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

302
15
0

643
109
0

537
99
0

614
106
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors

13
110
-39

122
75
-11

92
-144
217

-8
-73

-26

57

369

.

0

0

0

60
19
5

75
52
54

0
31
72

_

_

__

_

_

4- .

-7

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Foreign direct investment

Portfolio equityi

t

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments

Composton of 1999 debt (USS mill.)
A 355
c 86

D

580

F 1,054

1,326
0
25
78

Net flows

15

-2

-41

-53

Interest payments
Net transfers

11
4

55
-57

28
-68

28
-81

Development Economics

G:638

A - IBRD
B -IDA
c - IMF

D - Other muftisteral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

1112t00

ANNEX Bi: CountryProgramMatrix, FYO1-02

t

,'''

,

i

_

,

,

'.

___________

Over-archingobjective:Preventa reversalof recent gains in poverty reductionand pave the way for continuedpoverty reductionover the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adversedebt dynamicsand restore macro-financialstability in order to create an environment for growth
FY02: Support for poverty
*
* GoJ: Povertytracking updates
* Annual monitoringto improve * All partners
Over-archingObjective
analysis
(JSLC) in Sept. 2001 and Sept.
targetingof the poor.Maintain
* Poverty level is estimated at 16.9
2002
strong macroeconomic
percent for 1999 by the Government,
*
GoJ and Bank: Safeguard against
fraineworkto improve the
but recent gains in povertyreduction
poverty reversal. Poverty
environmentfor private sectorare reversible unless growtthoccurs
headcount target of 16 percent in
led growth through a
2002 (16.9 percent in 1999)
comprehensiveresolution of the
*
IMF- Staff Monitored
financial sector,and improve
indattan
Programn(SMP)
intervention
protection
social
attainmnent
IDB & CDB - Financial
*
sector loans

Short term Objective
* Goverfnmentinterventionin
financial sector ledto mounting debt
of 131 percent of GDP(excluding
intra-publicsector debt) by April
2000

*

GoJ and Bank: Total public
sector debt to be reduced to 114
percent of GDP by April 2002

*

FYO1-02:Two fast-disbursing
loans in support of a bank
restructuringand debt
managementprogram (BRDP)

1.Restoring EconomicGrowth
Rehabilitatingthe FinancialSector
* Governmentintervenedin several
domestic financial institutionsto
protectdepositors and stave off a
financial collapseand to prevent a
run on the local currency

*

*
Comprehensiveresolutionof
public sector liabilities associated *
with the intervention.
Restructure the financial sector *
through divestmentof the
financialinstitutions,disposal of
non-performingloans, and
strengtheningof prudential
regulationsand supervisory
capacity

*
IMF - SMP
IDB and CDB- Financial
sector loans
CDB - Technical
Assistance Grant
*

*
*

*
GoJ and Bank: Macroeconomic
*
and financial sector program on
track, includingthe sale of Union
Bank of Jamaica and significant
reduction of FINSACliabilities
GoJ: Governmentto explicitly
assume outstanding FINSAC
liabilities in April 2001 and
convert them into marketable
securities
NCB and LOJ to be prepared for
resolution
GoJ and Bank: establish Financial
Services Commissionfor
integrated supervisionof financial
institutionsby March 31, 2001

FY01: BRDP (first phase)
FY02: BRDP (second phase)

ANNEX Bi: Country Program Matrix, FY01-02

Over-archingobjective: Prevent a reversalof recentgains in poverty reluction and pave the way for continuedpoverty reductionover the longer term
Sbort term objective: To reverseadverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financialstability in order to create an environment for growth
Consolidating Fiscal Policy
The growinginterest bill on public * Maintain large primary surpluses *
RMF- SMP
*
GoJ: Reduce overall public sector *
Recently completed Social
sector debt (incl. FINSAC liabilities)
in FY01 and FY02 so as to
*
EU
deficit to 4.9 percent of GDP by
Sector Expenditure Review
was the mainreason for public
reverse the adverse debt
April 2001 and 0.6 percent of GDP *
Evaluation of Tax
sector deficits (9.1 percent of GDP
dynamics
by April 2002
Administrationproject
in 1999/2000,inclusive of interest * Reduce the debt stock by using
*
GoJ: Continued expenditure
*
Ongoing Public Sector
due on FINSACliabilities but not
the proceedsof planned
restraint in the next two budgets
Modernizationproject
paid)
divestmentsof public enterprises
* National Water Commission
and intervenedfinancial
(NWC): Implementthe
institutions
performance targets approved by
*
Strengthentax administration
the Office of Utility Regulation
* Reform public enterprises
(OUR) set for end-2000/01
Strengtheningthe Frameworkfor
Private Investment
* Need to rationalizethe public sector. *
The infrastructureinvestment
demands are large and the
Governmentdoes not have the
resources
* Private sector-ledactivities impeded
by structural,regulatoryand
macroeconomicfactors.
*
* Erosion of competitivenessin recent
years owing to exchange rate
appreciation
*
*

Improve incentivesfor private
sector by improving financial
intermediationand creatinga
frameworkfor a decline in
interest rates, reducing labor
marketrigidities and combating
crime
Strengthenregulatory
frameworksin critical sectors to
leverageprivate sector
participation
Stimulateprivate productionby
land titling and improving access
to credit for small businesses
Do not allow exchangerate to
appreciate,and focus on
providingan enabling
environment

*
*

*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*

*
*

[DB - Power sector reform
Germany - Energyproject
EU, DFID, UNDP, CIDAPublic Sector
EU, IDB - Ports
privatization
CIDA, DFID, IDB Justice system
EU,CIDA,USAIDTelecom reform
EU, CDB,JBIC, IDB Water reform
JBIC, EU, IDB, KFED Highway
CIDA, EU, USAID,IDB,
UNDP - Microenterprises
IDB, EU, CDB Agriculturalsector reform
IDB - Trade liberalization
USAID,EU, CIDACompetition laws

*

*
*

*

GoJ: Sell Jamaica Public Service
Company (JPSCo) by March 31,
2001
GoJ: Private operation of the water
company under new legislation
GoJ: Private sector participationin
a free zone management,airport
terminals,water utility.
GoJ: Maintain competitive
exchange rate and reduce existing
restrictions such as surrender
requirements

*
*

*

*

Ongoing Public Sector
Modernizationproject
Potential as well as some
ongoing IFC and MIGA
operations
Ongoing Private Investment
and Export Development
project
FY01: Social and Structural
Review including growth and
competitivenessissues

ANNEX B1: CountryProgramMatrix, FYO1-02

Over-archingobjective:Prevent a reversalof recentgains in povertyreductionand pavethe way for continuedpovertyreductionoverthe longerterm
for growth
stabilityin orderto createan environment
Shorttermobjective:To reverseadversedebtdynamicsand restoremacro-financial
2. ProtectingthePoorandEnsuringInclusion
EnhancingtheEfficiencyof Safety
Nets
in placewhich *
a At least45 programns
providemuchneededassistanceto
the poorandvulnerable;however,
thereareseveralshortcomings,
includingcoverage,errors,low
averagebenefits,highadministrative
of
overheads,fragmentation
programs,lackof eligibilitycriteria *
and inadequatetailoringof programs
to the needsof the poorand
vulnerable

reformof social *
Comprehensive
safetynetsfocusingonthe needs
of poorchildren,youthat risk, the
disabled,single-parent
householdslargeruralfamilies,
and
the long-termunemployed,
victimsof naturaldisasters.
Unifyandincreasespendingon
incometransferprograms,and
introducea cost-efficient,
transparentandaccessible
deliverymechanism

IDB,CDB,EU,DFIDSocialsafetynet andtheir
reform

*

*
*

*
*

GoJandBank:Socialsafetynet *
in2000/01and
expenditures
*
2001/02be maintainedin real
*
terms
GoJ:Eliminateineffective
*
programs
GoJ:Introduceearlychildhood
*
developmentprogramsand
establishstandardizedtargeting *
for safetynets
GoJ:Developuniversaltargeting *
mechanisms
GoJ:Improvetargetingof school
feedingprogramsbydirecting
benefitsto poorstudents,
increasingcoverage,and
improvingthe nutritionalcontent
of meals

*

GoJ:Developa strategyfor
pensionreform

OngoingSocialInvestment
Fund
Plannedevaluationof SIF
FY01:Assessmentof social
programs
FY01:Socialsafetynet reform
project
FY01:Youth-at-riskreport
FY01:Socialand Structural
Review
FY02:Povertystudy

ANNEX B1: Country Program Matrix, FY01-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverseadverse debtdynamicsand restoremacro-financialstabilityin order to create an environmentfor growth
ImprovingEducationalAttainment
* Near-universal9 years of education. * Increasenumberof schoolplaces * UNICEF,CIDA, CDB,
* GoJ: Abolish automatic
* Ongoing Reform of Secondary
However,enrollmentrate declines in
in upper secondaryschool.
DFID- Basic education
promotion from primary through
Education (ROSE)project
secondaryeducationand this
*
Improve learningoutcomesat all * IDB, USAID,DFIDsecondary schooling
* Recently completedpolicy
* GoJ: Develop and introducea
report on secondaryeducation
levels
Primaryeducation
together with low attainmentat all
common core curriculumfor
*
Ongoing Student Loan project
* Ensurekey beneficiariesof
*
DFID, NET, IDB, EU,
levels is associatedwith
* FY02: ROSE 11
IBRD - Secondaryand
secondary education
educationexpansionare poor
delinquency,violence,youth
* GoJ: Provide textbooks,teacher
children
tertiary education
unemploymentand poverty
* Strengthenteacher skillsand
training for disadvantaged
improveincentivesin the use of
schools
teachers'services
* GoJ and Bank: Implement
* Reformeducationfinance
education finance reformsby
equalizationof allocationsto
different schooltypes, improving
cost sharing at the secondary
level, and reducing leakageof
financial assistance
* GoJ and Bank: Increase
percentageof grade 9 students
having a place in grade 10to near
100 percent
ImprovingHealthServices
* Despite recentreforms and public * Change in the financingand
* IDB, PAHO,DFID, EU* GoJ: Introducenational health
* FOl: Bank's Regional
spendingof close to 4 percent of
organizationof sector to improve
Health sector reform
insurance system in the medium
Conference on HIV/AIDS
GDP per year,the aging of Jamaica's
efficiency,equality and quantity * EU, USAID,Germany,
term
* FY01: Regional projecton
populationand other factors have
* Developand introducea national
JICA, NET - Health
* GoJ: Separate policy-makingand
HIV/AIDS
shifted the causesof morbidity and
healthinsurance system
services provision
operational functionsthrough
decentralizationof service
* Enhancepartnershipswith private * NET, Gennany,USAID,
mortalitytowardchronic and
delivery with the creationof
degenerativeconditions
sector
CIDA, PAHO,UNDP, IDB
* Janaica has a high HIV/AIDS
* Preventionand treatment
- HIV/AIDSprevention and
regional health authorities
prevalencerate among adults
treatment

ANNEX B1: CountryProgramMatrix, FYO1-02

Over-archingobjective:Prevent a reversalof recentgains in poverty reductionand pave the wav for continuedpoverty reductionover the longer term
Short term objective: To reverseadverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financialstability in order to create an enviroiment for growth
Stimulating Labor-intensive Growth

Rigidities in labor market and wage *
setting mechanismsare exacerbating
unemploymentproblems,in
particular among women and youth

Modernize collectivebargaining *
process, expand social pact to
cover all sectors, introduce
preventiveconciliation to avoid *
strikes and reduce time lag in
tribunalawards

GERMANY,UNDP,EU, *
IDB, JICA - Skills Training
Program
CIDA - Facilitatinglabor
market reforms
*
*

GoJ: Reviews of vocational,
*
skills and community-based
training programs in terms of
effectiveness(apprenticesjob
placement), administrativecosts
and degree of targetingto the
poor
GoJ: Move to social partnerships
in specific sectors, including
sugar and tourism
GoJ: Implement the amended
Trade Union Act during 2000-02

FY01: Labor Market Analysis
as part of Social and Structural
Review, buildingon work done
so far

3. Improving Governance,Efficiencyand Effectivenessin the Public Sector
Divesting from CommercialActivities
* Despite progress on divestingpublic *
entities over the past decade, the
experiencehas been mixed.
*
Governmentre-acquiredactivities in
sugar, urban transport, and financial
institutions

ImprovingManagementand
InformationSystems
* Need to further improvethe
financial and human resources
managementsystems

*
*

Continueto introduce private
managementand financing
Strengthenregulatory
frameworksin all utilities

*

Customer service improvement
programs in 25 agencies
Computerizationof tax and
customs administration

*

IDB, EU

*
*

*

IDB - IntegratedFinancial
Management
EU - Budget Management
and Support

*

*

GoJ: Privatizationof power and *
water utilities and the two
international airports
GoJ: Move towards privatization
of roads and railways

Ongoing Private Investment
and Export Development
project

GoJ: Complete testing of
*
Integrated computer Tax
Administration System and
introducethe new system to
increase tax revenues
GoJ: Bring small businesses and
informal sector under tax net and
increase their compliance with
existing regulations

Ongoing Tax Administration
and Public Sector
Modernizationprojects

ANNEX BI: CountryProgram Matrix,FY01-02

Over-archingobjective:Prevent a reversalof recentgains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adversedebt dynamicsand restore macro-financialstability in order to create an environmentfor growth
Reforming Public Managementand
Incentives
* The public sector has seen a
* Continuewith efforts to introduce * EU, DFID, UNDP, CIDA- * GoJ and Bank: Completethe
*
Ongoing Public Sector
proliferation of agencies, and suffers
New Public Management
Public Sector Reform
conversion of 17entities into ten
Modernizationproject
from inefficient businesspractices
patterned on reformsin the UK * IDB, UNDP,CIDA,
executive agencies and strategic * FY01: Country Portfolio
and a lack of focus on results and
and New Zealand
UNICEF - Decentralization
reform of key ministries
Performance Review
accountability, whichhave often
*
Strengthenproject preparation * EU, CIDA, UNDP - civil
* GoJ: Restrict ministries to core * FY0 1: Country Financial
translated into low quality of
and implementationcapacity
society/electoralreform
functions of policy formulation
Accountability Assessment
delivered services
and evaluation. Transfer
*
FY0 1: Country Procurement
* Despite progress,financial
implementationto relevant
Assessment Review
managementand procurement
agencies
practices need strengthening
*
GoJ: Implement
recommendationsof Strategic
Review
* GoJ and Bank: Finalize
procurement manual and
handbook of procurement
procedures in 2000-01
4. EnsuringSustainable Development
GeneratingSynergy in the
Environment-EconomyRelationship
*

Tourism, bauxite mining and
*
agricultureare dominantactivities.
But they also contribute to
environmentaldegradation.
*
Increased air and water pollution has
adverse impacton poor
*

Create a framework for the
sustainableuse of natural
resources
Promotepolicies based on
"polluterspay" principle
Enhancepartnershipswith civil
society

*
*

CIDA, USAID,UNDP,
*
GEF, IDB - Environmental
Policy Management
EU, CIDA, UNDP,IDB Watershed Management

GoJ: Strengthenthe institutional *
capacityfor environmental
management, in particular in
waste, coastal zone and
watershed management

Initiating preparation of a
regional project on biodiversity
protection funded by the GEF

ANNEX B1: CountryProgramMatrix, FY01-02

Over-arching objective: Prevent a reversal of recent gains in poverty reduction and pave the way for continued poverty reduction over the longer term
Short term objective: To reverse adverse debt dynamics and restore macro-financial stability in order to create an environment for growth
Stimulating Agricultural Growth

*

*
About 75 percent of poor live in
rural areas. Rural poor are small
farmers, fishermen,unskilledwage *
laborers.High costs and low
productivitya key issue

Invest in quantity and quality of *
assets ownedby rural poor
Improveagricultural productivity
in particularin sugar and bananas
as prefercntialaccessis croded

CDB, EU, IDB,JICA Agricultural supportand
production

*
*
*

*

GoJ: Improve rural educationand
health services
GoJ: ImplementNational
IrrigationPlan
GoJ: Facilitate credit access and
supportagro-industry
GoJ: Accelerate land titling and
leases

Linking Tourism and Sustainable
Development

*

Sustainabilityof tourism dependson *
improved managementand
participation

Facilitate managementof the
natural resourcesand
diversificationof tourism product
and wider stakeholder
participation

*

*

GoJ: Enforce "polluter pay" laws
and tax incentives
GoJ: Raise revenue for financing
environmentalprotection

Improving Disaster Preparedness

*

*
Jamaica is vulnerableto
earthquakes,hurricanesand flooding
due to rising sea-level

Continueto update the National *
EnvironmentalAction Plan
includingthe disaster mitigation
strategies

*

Need for an integratedapproachto *
*
natural resourcemanagementin
connectionwith the tourism industry *
Caribbeanregion has identified
education,HIV/AIDS,governance, *
tourism-environmentissues as
*
priorities for next 3 years

*
Identify regional approaches
*
Enhance human development
Improve governanceto deal with
crime and violence
Safeguard enviromnentto ensure
tourism sustainability
PreventH1V/AIDS

CDB, IDB

*

*

Ongoing CaribbeanPlanning
for Adaptationto Global
Climate Change project

*
Bank: Explore with several
Caribbeancountriesthe
enviromnentalpriorities relating
to bio-diversityand eco-tourism
*
Bank: Organize CGCED
meetings and take the lead in the
preparationof studies and
projects with active participation *
of civil society and extemal
agencies

FY01: Ongoing regional
studies on catastrophic
reinsuranceand risk
management
Ongoing Small States
initiative, Vision 2020 study
and other regional reports
FY01: Regional project on
HIV/AIDS

GoJ: Prepare,with external
assistance,strategiesfor hazard
mitigation, land mapping,
earthquakehazardassessment
and oil spill contingencyplan

5. Regional Agenda

*

*
GEF
EU, 1DB,CDB,UNDP,UK,
DFID, CIDA. PAHO
*

Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 10/12/2000

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under hnplementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Numbera, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Numbera, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amounta, d
Disbursement Ratio (%)e

1998

1999

2000

2001

7
3.6
28.6
40.8
42.9
55.5
14.2

7
4.6
28.6
40.8
42.9
53.8
18

6
5.2
0
0
16.7
18.1
55.7

6
5.5
0
0
0
0
9.2

yes
422
60.3

no
474.3
67.8

yes
544.8
90.8

n/a
n/a
n/a

PortfolioManagement
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$ thousands)
Average Supervision(US$ thousands/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80
45
933.9
47.7
48.5

Last Five FYs
5
150.3
40
43.3

a. As showninthe AnnualReporton PortfolioPerformance(exceptfor currentFY).
b. Averageageof projectsin the Bank'scountryportfolio.
progress(IP).
c. Percentof projectsratedU or HU on developmentobjectives(DO)and/orimplementation
d. As definedunderthe PortfolioImprovementProgram.
e. Ratio of disbursementsduringthe yearto the undisbursedbalanceof the Bank'sportfolioat the
beginningof the year:Investmentprojectsonly.
* All indicatorsare for projectsactivein the Portfolio,withthe exceptionof Disbursement
Ratio,
whichincludesall activeprojectsas wellas projectswhichexitedduringthe fiscalyear.

Annex B3
Bank Group Program Summary
Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Programa'
Fiscalyear
2001

2002

US$
(million)

Project
Bank Restructuringand Debt Management
Social Safety Net Reform
Subtotal FY01
Bank Restructuring and Debt ManagementII
Reform of Secondary Education (ROSE) II
Subtotal FY02
Total

75.0
35.0
110.0
75.0
35.0
110.0
220.0

Strategic
Rewards
(H/IML) bl

Implementation
b
Risks (HIMIL)

H
H

H
M

H
H

H
M

IFC & MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001 c
1998

1999

2000

IFC approvals (US$m)

0.00

0.00

0.00

MIGA guarantees(US$m)

0.00

0.00

0.00

a. This table presentsthe proposed program for Bankfiscal years 2001 and 2002. Note that this does not include: (i) proposedsupport for
a regionalHIV/AIDSprogram which is expected to benefit Jamaica;and (ii) GEF-fundedenvironmentalmanagementinitiatives.
b. For each project,high (H), moderate(M), or low (L) indicatesthe expectedstrategic rewards and implementationrisks.
c. FY200 Ito date.

2001
-

Annex B4
Summary of Non-Lending Services
Product

Completion

Audiencea

Objectiveb

FY96
FY96

G/B/D
G/B/D

KG/SS
KG/PS

FY97
FY00

G/B/D/P
G/B/D

KG/PS/SS
KG/PS/SS

FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00

G/B/D
G/B/D
G/B/D
G/B

PS
KG/ PS
KG/PS
KG/PS

FY00

G/B

KG/PS

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY0I
FY01
FY01

G/B
G/B/D/P
G/B
G/B
G/B/D/P
G/B/D

KG/PS
KG/PS/SS
KG/PS
KG/PS
KG/PS/SS
PS

FY02
FY02

G/B/D
G/B/D/P

PS
KG/PS/SS

FY03

G/B/D/P

KG/PS/SS

Recentcompletions
Public Expenditure Review
Achieving Macro-Stability and Removing Constraints
to Growth (CEM)
Urban Poverty and Violence
Secondary Education: Improving Quality and Extending
Access
Country Portfolio Perfomance Review
Social Sector Expenditure Review
Labor Market Analysis
Macroeconomic Policy and Poverty in Jarnaica: An
Evaluation of Options
Assessment of JSIF Interventions in Inner Cities
Underway
Assessment of Social Assistance Programs
Youth At Risk
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Caribbean Gender Review
Country Portfolio Perfomance Review

Planned
Country Portfolio Perfomance Review
Growth and Competitiveness Study (possibly Social and
Structural Review)
Poverty Study

a. Government(G),Donor(D), Bank(B),Publicdissemination(P).
b. Knowledgegeneration(KG),Problem-solving
(PS), Strategy-setting
(SS).

Annex B5
Social Indicators
Sameregion/incomegroup2

Latestsingleyear
iVufLatin
.

' .\1
POPULATION
Total population,mid-year(millions)
Growthrate (%annualaverage)
Urban population(%ofpopulation)
Total fertilityrate (birthsper woman)

Lowermiddleincome

1970-75

1980-85

1993-99

America
& Carib.

2.0
1.7
41.2
4.5

2.3
1.6
47.8
3.5

2.6
1.0
50.2
2.8

509.2
1.6
74.9
2.7

2,093.7
1.1
42.9
2.1

3,840
147

1,200
145

3.0
4.8

POVERTY
f/o ofpopulation)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNPper capita (US$,Atlas methodology)
Consumerprice index(1995=100)
Food priceindex(i995=100)

..

..

..

..

..

..

1,390
2
1

16.9
10.6
22.0

900
10
9

2,330
146
132
0.4
7.0
43.9

INCOME/CONSUMPTION
DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (lo of income or consumption)

..

..

..

..

Highest quintile(9o of income or consumption)

..

..

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%lof GDP)

..

..

Education(% of GDP)

..

..

3.7
7.4

..

..

0.5

3.3
3.6
7.4

Social securityand welfare(%/of GDP) 31
Net primaryschool enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female

99

98

98

95

98

..

..

..

..

99
96

96
94

98
97

83
98
69

75
84
45

86
90
84

93
82
8

92
93
15

70
67
73

69
67
72

Access to improvedwatersource
(%oof population)

Total
Urban
Rural

..
..
..

Immunizationrate
(f/ under 12months)
DPT
Measles (12 - 24 months)
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

..

..

..

..

..

..

84
82
4

68
67
70

71
69
72

71
69
72

35

27

25

31

33

..

..

..

38

39

..

..

..

..

..

..

216
116

194
134

..

..

..

..

78

69

Life expectancyat birth
(years)

Total
Male
Female
Mortality

Infant(per thousandlive births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult(15-59)
Male (per 1,000population)
Female (per 1,000population)
Maternal (per 100,000live births)
Births attendedby skilledhealth staff (f%)

1ll

98

1/ Figuresreceived fromthe PlanningInstituteof Jamaica
2/ Figuresfrom the WorldBank live databasesystem

3/ Someelementscountedhereunderhealthandeducationexpenditures
couldalsobe regardedas fallingunderthiscategory.Suchan
adjustmentwouldmore than double$he shareof social securityand welfare.

Annex B6
Key Economic Indicators - Base Case Scenario
---------Indicator
Nationalaccounts(as % of GDP)
Grossdomesticproduct(factor cost)
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Actual ----------

Estimate

---------

Projected ---------

1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04
100
9.1
38.8
52.1

100
8.4
36.8
54.8

100
8.0
35.4
56.6

100
8.0
33.7
58.4

100
8.2
32.8
58.9

100
8.3
33.0
58.7

100
8.3
32.4
59.2

100
8.5
32.3
59.2

100
8.6
32.1
59.4

Total Constunptiona
Grossdomesticinvestment
Govermmentinvestment
Private investment
(includesincreasein stocks)
Exports(GNFS)b
Imports(GNFS)

79.6
31.8
5.4
26.4

80.5
32.3
5.9
26.4

81.8
32.4
5.6
26.8

79.0
29.0
2.9
26.1

79.7
29.6
3.0
26.6

79.8
30.0
3.2
26.8

77.8
30.5
2.7
27.7

76.8
31.0
4.0
26.9

74.3
32.4
4.4
28.1

56.1
67.4

48.7
61.5

43.5
57.7

47.2
55.2

46.7
56.0

49.0
58.8

49.0
57.3

49.8
57.5

50.6
57.3

Grossdomesticsavings
Grossnationalsavings'

25.0
30.0

24.3
30.7

22.7
27.7

21.9
26.0

20.6
25.1

20.2
25.2

22.2
25.1

23.2
25.6

25.7
27.9

5,239

5,864

6,653

7,109

7,210

7,376

7,761

8,161

8,574

2,077

2,310

2,605

2,760

2,775

2,815

2,938

3,066

3,198

-1.4

-2.1

-0.5

0.0

1.5

2.5

2.8

3.2

-2.7
-1.1
-3.8

-1.4
-4.7
-8.5

-0.9
0.0
2.3

0.6
0.5
1.5

1.7
0.7
2.1

2.0
1.3
1.7

2.5
-0.7
-0.9

Memorandumitems
Grossdomesticproduct
(US$millionat current prices)
GDP percapita (US$ at currentprices)

Real annualgrowth rates(%/o,
calculatedfrom 1986prices)
Gross domesticproductat marketprices
0.7

Real annualper capitagrowth
rates (c/6,calculatedfrom 1986prices)
Gross domesticproductat market prices
-0.3
-2.0
Totalconsumption
3.9
-0.9
Private consumption
3.3
-3.9
Balanceof Payments(US$ millions)
Exports(GNFS)b
MerchandiseFOB
Imports(GNFSP
MerchandiseFOB
Resourcebalance
Net currenttransfers
Currentaccountbalance
Currentaccountbalance as %of GDP
Net privateforeigndirect investmnent
Long-termloans(net)
Official
Private
Othercapital(net,incl.errors&ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandumitems
Resourcebalance(% of GDP)
Real annual growthrates ( YR86 prices)
Merchandiseexports(FOB)
Primary
ManufactLres
Merchandiseimports(CIF)

3,435
1,802
3,807
2,703
-372
584
-123
-2.3
88
-137
-79
-57
219
-47

3,369
1,689
3,888
2,710
-519
658
-93
-1.6
104
20
-175
195
121
-152

3,399
1,703
4,080
2,850
-681
611
-386
-5.8
169
149
-249
398
14
53

3,353
1,551
3,925
2,661
-572
638
-217
-3.0
309
106
-144
251
-213
14

3,366
1,535
4,037
2,719
-671
698
-326
-4.5
249
-81
23
-104
281
-122

3,615
1,658
4,337
2,958
-722
780
-352
-4.8
365
262
38
224
15
-290

3,804
1,733
4,450
3,004
-645
738
-415
-5.4
319
232
11
221
25
-161

4,060
1,869
4,696
3,177
-635
748
-434
-5.3
350
-156
-30
-127
25
215

4,339
2,014
4,916
3,324
-577
757
-392
-4.6
367
44
-24
68
25
-44

-7.1

-8.8

-10.2

-8.0

-9.3

-9.8

-8.3

-7.8

-6.7

13.7
13.7
0.9
23.6

-6.9
-5.3
-13.3
0.4

-2.3
2.0
-14.9
4.5

-7.2
-10.6
-4.2
-1.4

-3.8
0.1
4.7
-2.9

3.9
5.7
6.4
4.9

3.3
3.1
6.2
2.8

5.2
4.6
5.8
4.4

5.2
4.7
S.2
2.2

(Continued)

Annex B6
Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)
---------Indicator

Price indices(YR86=100)
Merchandiseexport price index
Merchandiseimportprice index
Merchandiseterms oftrade index
Real exchangerate indexf
Consumerprice index (%change)
GDP deflator(% change)

Estimate -

Projected ---------

1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04

Public finance(as % of GDPat marketprices)'
Currentrevenues (incl.grants)
31.4
Current expenditures
24.1
Current accountsurplus(+) or deficit(-)
7.3
Capitalexpenditure
6.1
Foreignfinancing
-2.0
Monetaryindicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%/o)

Actual ---

28.6
29.5
-0.9
6.2
-2.2

27.7
30.8
-3.1
5.5
1.2

28.0
32.7
-4.7
2.9
1.2

30.3
32.6
-2.4
2.9
-1.8

32.7
31.2
1.5
3.2
2.7

30.5
26.8
3.7
2.7
2.9

30.2
25.2
5.0
4.0
-2.0

29.8
24.2
5.6
4.4
0.4

28.6
24.4
197.7

31.9
31.8
23.4

30.0
2.5
-84.0

30.4
11.9
-68.3

32.1
16.4
-80.0

32.2
8.8
-75.9

32.3
10.0
77.4

32.3
9.0
19.9

32.3
8.1
40.7

169.0
141.4
119.5
1.08

170.1
141.9
119.9
1.35

175.7
131.2
133.9
1.45

172.5
119.5
144.3
1.48

177.5
130.7
135.8
1.42

184.5
157.9
116.9
1.42

186.7
156.6
119.3
1.42

191.4
158.6
120.7
1.42

196.0
162.0
121.0
1.42

21.7
25.2

21.5
17.7

9.1
10.5

8.1
6.8

6.3
7.9

7.7
6.8

6.8
6.6

6.3
5.8

5.5
4.9

a. GDP at marketprices
b. "GNFS"denotes "goodsand nonfactorservices."
c. Includesnet unrequitedtransfersexcludingofficial capitalgrants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources; negative denotesincrease.
e. Budgetarycentral government.
f. An increase in the indexdenotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Key Exposure Indicators - Base Case Scenario

---------Indicator
Total debt outstanding
(TDO) (US$m)'

Actual ----------

Estimate

---------

Projected ---------

1995/96 1996/97 1997/98 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04
4,262

3,981

3,913

4,026

4,039

4,480

4,721

4,575

4,632

3,640
622

3,285
695

3,039
874

3,216
810

3,165
875

3,411
1,069

3,625
1,096

3,451
1,124

3,478
1,153

Net disbursements(US$m)

-122

-149

93

1

-70

245

215

-173

29

Total debtservice (TDS;US$m)'

673

674

641

537

652

666

720

1,157

703

of which:
PublicandPubliclyGuaranteed(PPG)
Short Term and Private Non-Guarantee(

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
124.1

118.1

115.1

120.1

120.0

123.9

124.1

112.7

106.7

TDO/GDP'
PPG DOD/GDP b,o

91.7

59.8
46.5

58.6

58.8

62.0

46.8

46.0

47.2

62.0
47.6

56.9
42.9

54.4

78.3

63.8
52.6

TDS/XGNFS

19.6

20.0

18.9

16.0

19.4

18.4

18.9

PPGDS/XGNFS
Concessional/lDO

18.5
31.5

18.8
31.3

17.4
27.7

14.4
26.3

17.9
24.3

15.7
22.7

16.4
20.1

28.5
26.1
17.1

16.2
13.9
16.3

IBRDDS/publicDS
PreferredcreditorDS/public DS (%)

20.8
50.8

19.1
44.3

17.9
42.0

20.6
40.2

12.5
32.1

13.7
38.0

12.9
37.5

7.6
22.3

13.4
37.9

IBRDDS/XGNFS
IBRD DOD (USSm) d

3.8
595

3.6
515

3.1
431

3.0
410

2.2
383

2.1
422

2.1
476

2.0
476

1.9
472

Share of IBRD portfolio (%)

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Equity and quasi-equity f

22.0
2.0

0.0
0.0

45.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees(US$m)

42.2

38.4

0.0

0.0

0.0

...

...

TDO/XGNFS b

40.9

IBRD exposureindicators (%)

IDA DOD (US$m)
IFC Commitments(US$m)e
Loans

Note: All debt and debt service data relate to external debtonly
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt,private nonguaranteed,use of IMF credits and net short-termcapital.
b. "XGNFS"denotesexports of goods and non-factor services.
"TDO"comprises PPG, Private Non-Guaranteed,and Short Term debt.
"DOD"denotes Debt Outstandingand Disbursed
c. External debt converted at end-period exchangerate.
d. Includes presentvalue of guarantees.
e. World Bank fiscalyear.
f. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As of 10/12/2000
ClosedProjects 56
Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Active Proiects
Last PSR

Project ID

Project Name

P007485

PRIVATE INESTMENT AND EXPORT
DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC SECTOR MODERNIZATION
REFORM OF SECONDARY EDUCATION
SOCIALINVESTMENTFUND
JAMAICA STUDENT LOAN
TAXADMINISTRATIONREFORM

P007490
P007479
P039029
P038700
P007489

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

IDA

GE

35

0

0

0

9.3

9

0

1997
1993
1997
1997
1994

28.4
32
20
28.5
13.2

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

22.8
5.1
1.4
6.1
1.1

17.1
4.9
-0.1
4.2
1.1

6.9
0
1.4
0
1.1

Total

157.1

0

0

0

45.7

36.2

9.4

Develonment
Objectives

Imolementation
Proeress

Fiscal Year

S

S

1994

S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S

IBRD

Cancel.

mDements'

Dibrs

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Supervision Rating

to dateas projectedat appraisal.
to dateminusactualdisbursements
a.Intendeddisbursements
Loans/CreditsSummaryin USD
OriginalPrincipal
Cancellations
Disbursed

Undisbursed
Repaid
Due
ExchangeAdjustment
Borrower'sObligation

As of September20, 2000
1,326,000,000
90,019,937

0
0

1,326,000,000
90,019,937

1,190,264,129

0

1,190,264,129

45,715,934
823,919,334
364,767,931
-11,886,058
352,881,871

0
0
0
0
0

45,715,934
823,919,334
364,767,931
-11,886,058
352,881,871

Sold 3rd Party

1,576,864

0

1,576,864

Repaid 3rdParty
Due 3rd Party

1,576,864
0

0
0

1,576,864
0

Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 08/31/00
(In US Dollars Millions)
Disbursed

Held
FY Approval
1995

Company
JamaicaEnergyPartnersOld HarbourDieselProject
TotalPortfblio:

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

16.82

0

0

37.84

16.82

0

0

37.84

16.82

0

0

37.84

16.82

0

0

37.84

Annex B9
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Network area

Country
Performance

Major issue

Country
priority

Bank
priority

Poverty Reduction and
EconomicManagement
*
Povertyreduction

Fair

Persistenceof low growth and high
unemploymentthreatens to reverse
(unexplained)poverty improvementsof
recent years.

High

High

*

Economic policy

Fair

Fiscal consolidationis critical to reverse
adverse debt dynamics. Need to improve
competitiveness,notably throughstructural
reformsin the labor market.

High

High

*

Public sector

Fair

Despite reforms, shortcomingsin the
efficiencyand accountabilityof the public
sector persist. Need to strengthenpolicy
formulationcapacity and quality of public
service delivery.

High

High

*

Gender

Good

High unemploymentamong women and
vulnerabilityof female-headedhouseholds.
Marginalizationof males.

Moderate

Moderate

Humandevelopment
*
Education

Fair

Quality shortcomingsat all levels and
access issues at the secondarylevel.
Generally low educational outcomes.

High

High

*

Health, nutrition and
population

Good

Key issues concem reproductivehealth of
adolescentsand youth, AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases.

High

Moderate

*

Socialprotection

Fair

Numerous programs with limitcd bencfits,
duplicationand high administrativecosts,
and coordination shortcomings.

High

High

Environmentallyand
Socially Sustainable
Development
*
Rural development

Poor

Shortcomings in rural infrastructureand
managementof watersheds. Limited
support services for agriculture. Need for a
well-articulatedrural development strategy.

High

Moderate

*

Environment

Fair

Need for better disposal of liquid and solid
waste. Risk uf degradation of watersheds
and coastal and marine resources.

Moderate

Moderate

*

Socialdevelopment

Fair

Need to combat crime and violence,enforce
law and order, and address youth-at-risk
and community voice and participation
issues.

High

Moderate

Finance,Private Sector
and Infrastructure
*
Financialsector

Poor

Liquidityand solvency problemsin
significant parts of the domestic financial
sector concentratedin 1996/97,continuing
weak intermediation and need to strengthen
regulatory and supervisory framework.

High

High

*

Private sector

Fair

High cost of capital. Weaknessesin
regulatory frameworkpersist.

Moderate

Moderate

*

Energyand mining

Good

Need to accelerate privatizationin energy
sector. Further investmentneeded to
expand capacity in mining sector.

Moderate

Moderate

*

Infrastructure

Fair

Constrained public investmentsand
allocations for maintenance. Regulatory
framework for private participationneeds
strengthening.

High

Moderate

Reconciliation of country
and Bank priorities

Strong involvementby IDB,
USAID and other
development partners.
Jamaica to benefit from
planned Bank support for
regional program on
HIV/AIDS.

Strong involvementby the
EU, USAID and CDB, and
proposed involvement by
the IDB.

Ongoing dialogue and AAA
on youth-at-risk. Other
developmentpartners
supportingyouth programs
and initiatives to combat
crime and strengthenvoice
and participation.

EU, IDB, Japan and other
development partnersactive
in this area.

-

Annex C
Outlook for Selected EconomicIndicators
under an Alternative Medium-termMacroeconomicScenario
Key Indicators

Estimate
1999/00

Output
Growth of Real GDP (%)
Growth of Real per capita GDP (%)

------

---------

Projection ---------------

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

0
-0.9

0.5
-0.3

1
0.2

1.5
0.7

2
1.2

2.5
1.7

8.4
17.9
42.1

7
15.9

6.5
15

6
14.5

5
13.4

4
12.3

131.2
12.5
-4.3

125
13.9
-1.8

119.4
13.1
-0.1

114.3
11.9
-0.4

109
11.5
-0.6

103.9
11.1
-0.4

-4.5
801.3
17.9

-4.6
1067.5
15.8

-5
1179
16.5

-5
899.7
26.4

-4.5
876.4
14.2

-4.4
862.2
12.9

Prices
Inflationrate (CPI) (end of period)
Interest rates (180-day T-bills)
Average exchange rate (LCU/US$)
Public Finance (% of GDP)
Totalpublicdebt
Publicsectorprimarybalance
Central government balance
External
Current accountlGDP
Gross official reserves
Debt Service/Exports (%)

-

-

-

-

-

Annex D
Sustainable Public Debt Dynamics

The Jamaican authorities' program, in particular the plan to address the stock of outstanding
FINSAC liabilities, is expected to begin to reverse the rapid growth in public debt observed
during the past few years. However, the prospects for sustaining a reduction in the stock of
(internal and external)public debt (as a ratio of GDP) over the long term hinge sensitivelyon the
evolution of interest rates, inflation, GDP growth, and the extent of continued fiscal effort (as
measured by the primary surplus-to-GDP ratio). This point may be illustrated using a simple
definitionalrelationship to summarize the mechanics of public debt dynamics-that this (end of)
period's debt stock equals last year's, plus interest due on last year's stock, less this year's
primary surplus.' Such a relationship, widely used in the economics literature to discuss the
concept of the sustainablepublic sector deficit, can be used to identify the level of fiscal effort
(primary surplus) required in order to keep the public debt stock (as a ratio of GDP) stable over
time for different parameter values (growth, interest rates, inflation, and the inherited debt
stock).2 Table D.1 provides an illustrationfor a range of parametervalues.
Table D.1: Primary Surplus/Deficit(+/-: % of GDP)
Reauired to StabilizePublic Debt Stock
g, f, i in %
d in % of GDP
d=100
i=10
i=12
i=14
i=16
d=130
1=10
i=12
i=14
i7=16

-O
f1=8
1.9
3.7
5.6
7.4
2.4
4.8
7.2

9.6

2

166

f=6
3.8
5.7
7.5
9.4
4.9

f-18
-0.1
1.7
3.5
5.3
-0.2

1.7
3.6
5.4
7.3
2.3

f-8
-2.1
-0.3
1.5
3.3
-2.7

f6
-0.2
1.6
3.4
5.2
-0.3

7.4

2.2

4.7

-0.4

2.1

9.8
12.3

4.5

7.1

4.4

6.9

9.5

1.9
4.3

6.8

Thus, for example, if the inherited debt stock stands at 130 percent of GDP, the effective
(nominal) interest rate on the debt is 14 percent, growth is zero, and inflation is running at 6
percent, the primary surplus requiredto hold the debt-to-GDPratio stable is 9.8 percent of GDP.
A primary surplus that is any lower would result in an increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio (the
lower the primary surplus, the larger the increase), while a higher primary surplus would of
course entail a decline in the debt-to-GDPratio. For a lower (higher) interest rate, higher (lower)
growth,.and/or higher (lower) inflation, the primary surplus needed to stabilize a given debt-toGDP ratio is lower.
Thisequationcan be rearrangedto relatethis year's debt-to-GDPratio to last year's debt-to-GDPratio and this
year's interestrate,inflationrate, GDPgrowthrate, andprimarysurplus. Specifically
dt = {(l+it)/[(l+fO)(l+gt)]}d,-- St

whered denotesthe debt-to-GDPratio,i the (nominal)interestrate, f the inflationrate, g the real growthrateof GDP,
ands the primarysurplusas a ratioof GDP.
2

Arithmetically,
this is obtainedby settingd = d, = d and solvingfor s as a functionof i, f, g, and d.

3

It should be noted that the consistencyof these assumptions with a given fiscal stance is not necessarily assured.

However,for theillustrativepurposesat handthis is nota sourceof concern.Note alsothe implicitassumptionof no
divestment of public assets.

Annex E
CAS Consultations
A. Background
Specificinputfor the preparationof this CAS was obtainedthroughsuccessive,detaileddiscussionsand
reviews with the Ministry of Financeand Planning,the PlanningInstitute of Jamaica, and the Bank of
Jamaica. CAS discussions were also held with the Cabinet Secretary and Permanent Secretaries
representing all ministries. In addition, in agreement with the Government,the country team held
consultationmeetings with a broad spectrum of civil society stakeholders,including private sector
representatives,communityleaders, academics,representativesof non-governmentalorganizations,and
employerorganizations.Consultationswere also heldwith bilateraland othermultilateralagenciesactive
in Jamaica.
The CAS consultationprocesswas informedby very useful consultationsinitiatedearlieron the reformof
the social safetynet mechanisms. The meetingstook place as follows(apart from those with immediate
Govemmentcounterparts):
*
*
*
*

MontegoBay, Civil Society,September27, 2000(18 participants)
Kingston,DevelopmentPartners, September28, 2000 (18 participants)
Kingston,CabinetSecretaryand PermanentSecretaries,September28, 2000(13 participants)
Kingston,Civil Society,September29, 2000(15 participants)

B. MeetingDesignand Obiectives
The main objectiveof the CAS consultationswas to initiatea continuingand regular consultativeprocess
between the Bank and Jamaican stakeholderson the country's developmentagenda, and to understand
how the Bank could best support it. Each meeting lasted about three hours and was moderatedby a
professionalfacilitator. The first part of the meetingconsistedof a brief presentationby the countryteam,
whichcoveredJamaica's developmentobjectivesand challenges(as seen by the Bank's countryteam) as
a context for the currentCAS; an explanationof what a CAS is and the proposed strategyfor Jamaica,
includingthe proposed areas of financialand technicalsupport; and the rationale for selectionof these
areas. This was followedby questionsand answerson the CAS, the Bank's role, and other moregeneral
issues and/orconcernson Jamaica's developmentagenda. The second part of the meetingwas intended
to solicit participantviews on three questions:(a) the causes of persistentpoverty in Jamaica; (b) the
opportunitiesfor reducingpovertyand enhancingsustainabledevelopment;and (c) the key obstaclesto be
overcome. In all but the last meeting(due to time constraints),there was an additionalquestionon the
existenceof a comprehensivenationaldevelopmentstrategyinformedby consultationswith civil society.
C. Summaryof Particivants' Commentsin response to the Country Team's Presentation of the
DevelopmentAi!endaand proposedBankAssistance
Poverty, socialissues,and growth
* Growthnecessarybut not sufficientfor povertyreduction. Need for targetedprogramsto assist the
poor and importanceof givingthe poor themselvesa key role in shapingsuch programs.
* Lack of supportsystemsto maximizeuse of educationand lack of opportunitiesfor studentsfinishing
secondary education. Need for increased focus on human resource development, notably by
enhancingaccessto technicaland tertiaryeducation. Continuedweaknessesin educationattainment
at all levels, despite continuingprogress in enrollment. Educationthe crucial link in breaking the
viciouscycle of youth-at-risk,crime and violence,and othersocialproblems.
* Expansionof the informaleconomya possible explanationof the recent declinein poverty despite
many years of zero or negative officially recorded growth. May explain puzzling trends in, for

example, electricity and cement consumption. Possible links with illegal, including drug-related,
activity.
Governance-related issues
* Large size of the public sector coupled with heavy bureaucracy and shortcomings in service delivery.
Need for systematic evaluation of public sector reform efforts. Need to strengthen implementation
capacity.
* Need to strengthen the rule of law, including the consistency of application and enforcement of law.
* Need to strengthen corporate governance.
* Emphasis on the need to institutionalize mechanisms to increase voice and participation, particularly
at the community level.
Constraints or costs of doing business for private sector
* Lack of incentives for private sector development (tax regime constraints, unfavorable investment
environment, high costs of and poor access to funds).
* High import taxes (e.g. same tax levels for medical equipment as for furniture) hindering
development of the various professional disciplines.
* Inability of manufacturing industry to compete because of outdated equipment, inadequate technical
training and high costs of materials.
Environment and rural development
* Difficulties faced in agriculture, owing to skewed land ownership patterns and lack of resources to
cultivate the land. Impact on the persistence of poverty, given the high concentration of poor people
in rural areas.
* Need for increased focus on environmental (e.g., marine) protection, given the central role of natural
resource assets in economic activities critical to Jamaica (e.g., tourism).
D. Participants' Comments in response to questions on the National Development Strategv, Causes
of Poverty, O=3rtunities for Growth, and Obstacles to Development
Views on the existence of a comprehensive national development strategv informed by a consultative
nrocess with civil society
- Civil Society (Montego Bay): the prevailing perception was that there was a need for wider and more
intensive consultations on such a strategy in order to improve awareness and ownership by civil
society of a national development strategy.
* Development partners (Kingston): the existence of several consultation fora was acknowledged, but
participants saw a need for deepening and especially broadening both the consultation agenda and the
scope of individuals consulted.
* Permanent Secretaries (Kingston): while the existence of several consultation fora was cited,
participants expressed the view that expectations needed to be managed, and that civil society and the
private sector would need to follow through more systematically with support for reform measures
around which consensus had been built. It was also suggested that broadening and strengthening the
consultation process would be beneficial, and that there was interest in the Bank facilitating this.

Views on the causes of poverty, opportunities for growth, and obstacles to development
Shortcomingsin early childhooddevelopment,high occurrenceof teenage pregnancies,frequent
incidenceof female-headedhouseholds,marginalizationof males, absenceof leadership(role
models),low respect for law and order,low nationalpride, heavy dependenceon Governmentto
solveproblems,governanceand the politicalculture,inadequateinvestment,short-termeconomic
managementdrivenby perpetualcrises over the last three decades, fiscal and monetarypolicies
whichconstrainentrepreneurship
and opportunitiesfor a growingpopulation,shortfallsin accessto
and qualityof educationandtraining,inadequatecurriculain parts of the educationsystem,lack of
'life skills', limited developmentof humanresourcesand captureof intellectualproperty,limited
availability of jobs, low wages and low productivity, skewed income and asset ownership
distribution,migrationof well-educatedpeople,urbanization,high costsof materials(e.g., energy),
failureto developnew industries,underdevelopment
of naturalresources

>0

o

r

O

iS g>o
@;
Lb
0
s .g
o
O) i ffi

8 <,
S
mne
D >

Education and training, information technology, improving police-communityrelations and
reducing crimeand violence,communitydevelopment,smallbusinessdevelopment,labor market
reform, modernizationof the public sector, foreigninvestment,reductionin interest rates, rural
development(unutilized lands), forestry (cedar, mahogany),craft and furniture, better use of
natural resources (tourism), building conventionand conference centers, health care tourism,
Jamaica as retirement island, internationalsports developmentfacilities, globalization(regional
integrationfor greatereconomiesof scale), comparativeadvantagein language,location,andlinks
with majortradingpartners
Legalbarriers to doingbusiness,poor familyplanning,factionalizedcivil society,parallelsystem
of governmentin inner cities,crime and violence,lack of confidenceby the average individual,
lack of accountability,heavybureaucracy,poor infrastructure,high cost of production,high interest
rates, lack of credit availability,low private sectorinvolvementin the provisionof social services,
insufficienttechnicalknowledge

E. Conclusions and Lessons
The meetings were characterized by high energy and participation and the comments were constructive
and positive. Significantly, participants generally considered the country team's characterization of
Jamaica's development agenda to be the right one. They also did not express concerns regarding the
financial and technical support priorities proposed in the CAS, though several asked about the potential
for (increased) Bank involvement in other areas, such as rural development, tertiary education, and
enviromnental management. Overall, there seemed to be much appreciation for the consultation process.
Both Government and civil society expressed strong support for continuing this process and promoting a
broader and more in-depth dialogue with civil society in Jamaica, in order to help increase ownership and
deepen consensus on the overall development agenda.

ERD 20848

10

X~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ji

ii

~~~~~Jj
~~~~~~~~~~~~~FBRAYloss

