Public Disclosure Authorized

Documentof
The World Bank
Report No. 20354

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Public Disclosure Authorized

September8, 2000

Country ManagementUnit Argentina,Chile and Uruguay
PREM Network
Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office
The InternationalFinance Corporation
Latin America and CaribbeanDepartmnent

The FYO1-04Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), Report N. 20354, dated May 5,
2000, was discussed by the ExecutiveDirectorson June 27, 2000. Based on this
discussion, and in agreementwith the Governmentof Argentina, the CAS document
has been revised and made availablefor public information.
CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS
CurrencyUnit: ArgentinaPeso (Arg.$)
ARG$I = US$1
WEIGHTSAND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
ABBREVIATIONSAND ACRONYMS
CAS
1DB
IMF
IFC
MERCOSUR
MIGA
NBI
NGO
PSE
REPO
TRABAJAR
SME
SSAL

CountryAssistance Strategy
Inter-AmericanDevelopmentBahk
InternationalMonetaryFund
InternationalFinance Corporation
Southern Cone CommonMarket
MultilateralInvestment GuaranteeAgency
Indice de NecesidadesBasicas (Index of BasicNeeds)
Non-governmentalOrganization
Plan Social Educativo(Social EducationProgram)
Special RepurchaseFacility
Public Works EmploymentScheme
Small and Medium Size Enterprises
Special StructuralAdjustment Loan

WB Managers and Staff Responsiblefor this CAS
Vice President
Mr. David de Ferranti
Country Director
Ms. Myrna Alexander
Sector Director
Mr. Guillermo Perry
Task Manager
Mr. Mark Hagerstrom
IFC Managersand Staff Responsiblefor this CAS
ExecutiveVice President
Mr. Peter Woicke
Vice President, InvestmentOperations
Mr. Assaad Jabre
LAC Director
Mr. Karl Voltaire
Manager
Mr. Bernard Sheahan
Task Manager
Mr. ToshiyaMasuoka

THE ARGENTINEREPUBLIC
COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

A.

Executive Summary
Message from the Ministerof Economy

i-vi
vii- viii

ECONOMICAND SOCIALPERFORMANCE

1

EconomicReform and Growth
ExternalShocks
Recent EconomicDevelopments
Medium-TermProspects
Social Performance
The Poor
B.

MAIN DEVELOPMENTCHALLENGES
Poverty and Human ResourceDevelopment
Infrastructure
EnvironmentalConcems
Gender
ConsolidatingMacroeconomicReforms
PrLvateSector Development
Institutional Capacityand Governance
Provincial Reform

C.

D.

1
3
3
5
6
8
9
9
14
16
17
18
20
21
22

GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENTSTRATEGY

24

The First Steps
Medium-termAgenda

24
24

BANK GROUP COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY

27

Progress and Portfolio Performance
Client Survey and Feedback
Sector Perspectiveson Performance
Renewing the Country Strategy
Exposure, Net Flows
Selectivity in Setting Priorities
Comparative Roles of Other MultilateralInstitutions

27
28
29
34
35
35
42

An EvolvingRelationship
Risks

42
45

ANNEXES
Annex A
Annex A2
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8
Annex B8
Annex B9

Private SectorStrategy
CountryAt a Glance
Selected Indicatorsof Bank Portfolio Performanceand Management
Bank GroupProgram Summary
Bank Group Fact Sheet - IFC and MIGA Program
Summaryof NonlendingServices
Poverty and Social DevelopmentIndicators
Key EconomicIndicators
Key Exposure Indicators
OperationsPortfolio
Statementof IFC's Held and DisbursedPortfolio
CAS Program Matrix

MAP

IBRD 29348

ExecutiveSummary
The last Country AssistanceStrategy (CAS)for Argentina was consideredin May 1997
for FY98-00, when the countryhad regainedits economicfootingfollowing the regional
financial crisis of 1995. A Progress Report wasprovided in March 1998 in the midst of
the emergingcrisis in Asia. Theproposedprogramfor the Bank Group would span
FY01-04,the period of the new administrationthat took office in late 1999. Regular
progress reports would be provided to the Board in the interveningperiod
The Long Road to Reform
Since the launch of the ConvertibilityPlan in 1991, the Argentine economyhas been
undergoinga massive transformation. The mainfeature of this program, supported by the
World Bank Group, IDB and IMF, was the establishmentof a currency board
arrangement. This waspart of a sweepingset of reforms that altered the monetary
system, improvedfiscal and taxpolicies, liberalizedtrade, and reformed thepublic sector,
including a rapidprivatizationprogram and changes to the social security system.
All of this was intendedto reverse the historicalpattern ofpoor economic management
and volatilitythe countryhad sufferedfor theprevious 25 years. Public institutionshad
deteriorated and, importantly,poor performance severely eroded confidence in the
financial sector, resultingin large savings held abroad Externalfinancing bothfor the
private andpublic sector dominatedthel970s, leading to the 1982 debt crisis. Attempts
at stabilizing the economy,with Bank and Fund support, were made in the 1980s but
none succeeded Each time, inflationreturnedand surged to higher levels, culminating
in hyperinflationin 1989. Nonetheless,efforts to open and deregulateArgentina's
economyand a debate on the role of the state were started
Another attempt at reform began in 1989and the results have been dramatic. Argentina
has experiencedstrong averageeconomicgrowth in the 1990s. The size of the economy
expandedfrom $141 billion in 1990 to $282 billion in 1999, despite beinghit by external
shocks and two severe recessions. Argentina has now one of the world's lowest inflation
rates andproductivity has rapidly increased,respondingto the new economic signals.
The banking system has been strengthenedthrough improvementsin regulationand
supervision,privatization, restructuringand consolidation. The role of the state has been
changed, mainly as a result ofprivatization and decentralizationto theprovinces of
health and education. Tax reforms removed many distortions and reduced tax handles
and a newfederal public sectorfinancial managementsystem was implemented Poverty
quicklyfellfrom thepeak of 41 percent reachedin 1989-90.
Remaining Challenges
Despite this undeniableprogress, major issuesremain, includingthe vulnerability of the
economyto external shocks, compoundedby lagging competitiveness,persistentpoverty
(29%), including over 40percent of children,rising incomeinequality and high
unemployment(14%), especiallyfor the unskilled These statisticspoint to thefact that
the benefits of growth in the 1990shave not been shared Infrastructureis deficient,
-1i-

labor regulations rigid, and investments in education, research and development, low.
And there is still a long way to go to increase savings and deepen the domestic capital
market. Moreover, Argentina does not have an adequate safety net, nor has it yet
completed the modernization ofpublic institutions. This is particularly true at the
provincial level which experiences wide variation in performance and capacity.
Today, Argentina remains heavily indebted, despite the fact that total external debt is
now a more manageable 51 percent of GDP, as compared to almost 100 percent in 1989.
The public sector continues to rely on international capital markets to refinance its debt
stock. Part of this debt stems from the take over ofprivate sector debts in the early 1980s
and domestic debts, converted to US dollar obligations, during the 1980s and early
1990s. More recently public debt has risen to cope with the large fiscal deficits
associated with the Tequila and Russia/Brazil crises.
Social progress and economic progress go hand in hand and Argentina is clearly one of
the more developed countries in Latin America. However, certain social indicators have
been deteriorating-such as income equity and poverty-- and compare unfavorably with
neighboring Chile and Uruguay. Average statistics for Argentina also mask significant
variations with the provinces in the North east and North west being the most
disadvantaged Moreover, for its income level, Argentina has serious lags in social
infrastructure and it is notably weaker as regards policies for social inclusion/equity.
Public sector management also needs strengthening when it comes to transparency,
accountability and corruption.
Social spending in general at 18 percent of GDP compares favorably with Argentina's
neighbors. Much of thefiscal space created in the 1990s byprivatization has been used
to expand social programs. However, the bulk of this spending isfor the contributory
pension system and is not targeted Additionally, public programs for housing and
higher education--which is free for all-- could clearly be more equitable. Among
programs specifically for the poor, there are no major problems in targeting per se and
they are strongly pro-poor but their coverage is limited to only about 25 percent ofpoor
families. Furthermore, even this spending tends to be pro-cyclical and suffers from
budget cuts during fiscal tightening. Health indicators in Greater Buenos Aires are
comparable to many developed countries but third world problems remain in the poorer,
northern provinces. Looking at education, attainment at the primary level is satisfactory,
but secondary and higher education fare poorly relative to comparator countries and
progress in improving the system has been slow. In higher education, inefficiency in
public universities is compounded by regressive public spending.
A particular area for increased attention is the labor market and employment. At the end
of the 1980s, Argentina had low productivity and accumulated excess employment in both
the public and private sectors. Reforms redressed this situation but in the meantime
Argentina's economic transformation had shifted demand to more qualified workers and
use of technology. This has left unskilled workers unemployed or with depressed wages
and many below the poverty line. Moreover, reforms to make the labor market more
flexible have lagged A negative consequence has been the increase in the informal
sector, as both firms and employers seek to escape high costs and restrictive regulations.

-

ii

-

The down side is that these workersare excludedfrom many safety net programs, and
firms, mainlySMEs, cannotqualifyfor credit nor do they pay taxes.
At the same time, Argentina has experiencedwideninggaps in wagespaid to those with
modern skills and a stagnation in wages to those with low skills. Wage disparity,in turn,
has led to increasedincome inequalityand disillusionmentespeciallyamong older
workerswith obsoleteskills and womenand youths who lack both experienceand skills.
Theseproblems compoundthe sense of vulnerabilityfelt by the poor whose biggest
concern,as expressed in the Voicesfor the Poor, is securing stable work.
Argentina is a diverse countrywith significantregionaldisparities. The reforms enacted
during the 1990s are changingthese regional economies,with a substantialshift infavor
of natural resources. The growth of these regionaleconomiesmake new demandson
provincial and municipalgovernmentsto provide servicesandfoster investment in
addition to their responsibilitiesin health and education. At present, that capacity
rangesfrom very good to verypoor and infrastructureinvestment has lagged Access to
water and sewage systems in urbanareas remainsdeficient, and is even worse in rural
areas. Poor householdssufferfrom overcrowding,lack running water, and often live in
areas of high risk offlooding. Next to securing better employment,improving
infrastructurewas the greatest concern heard in the Voicesof the Poor.
Continuing the Transformation
Bank support, along with that of the IDB and IMF, has been critical in Argentina 's
transformation. But this process is not yet complete and it will take more time and effort
to address a complex set of economic, institutionaland social issues. Some of these are
part of the unfinished agendafrom the 1990s,and others are part of the process of
adapting to the global economy. From thepoint of view of the poor,job creation is the
highest priority. This will require:
-

reductions in the cost of capital and improving access of the private sector
(particularly middle-market and SMEs) to long term financing through capital
market development. These developmentswill also stimulatesectors such as
construction that offer employmentopportunitiesfor the unskilled;

*

the reduction of non-wage labor costs (payrolltaxes and other mandatory
contributions) in theformal labor market with a commensurateexpansionof workers
covered by health insurance andpensions;

*

improvement in skills and education,particularly in secondary education, the
inadequacyof which became apparent in the courseof economic restructuringunder
the ConvertibilityPlan;

*

reduction of transaction costs, due to the incompletetransformationof institutions
such as the tax system,judiciary, and customs,both at thefederal and sub-national
levels, and high logistic and inventory costs, which are nearly three times higher than
OECD countriesand over 30 percent of GDP.
- 111 -

Beyond sound economic management,investment in education, andpro-employment
growthpolicies, there are a number ofpolicies that would help thepoor and address
their concerns of vulnerabilityand access to public services. These include:
* expandingthe coverage of social safety nets, which are generally well targeted and
effective,and making theseprograms counter cyclical. At the same time, some
programs, such qs in nutrition, housing andjob training, should be restructured
* focusing public health care expenditureson those without health insurance, by
improving cost recoveryand the efficiencyof thepublic system.
* becauseof the large numberofpoor children,promoting responsibleparenthood and
family capacity development, includingaccess to reproductivehealth services.
* in urban areas,providing basic infrastructure services,such as water, sanitation and
roads, andproviding regular land titles in areas of illegal or informal settlement.
* for the rural poor, including indigenouspopulations, who have been largely
forgotten, addressingsustainabledevelopment,incomegeneration, access to safe
water and other services, and communitydevelopment.
Finally, environmental degradationposes a threat to the health and livelihood of both
thepoor and non-poor. Strongerpolicies andprograms are required to reduce the
threats to water suppliesposed by industrialand hazardous wastes in urban areas, to
improve water management in rural areas, and to stop excessive soil erosion and
overexploitationof marine and other sensitive resources.
In many of these areas, the Bank is alreadyengaged, with relatively good progress being
made, as reflected in OED's recent Country Evaluation Update. In other areas, we
would be opening up new activities, supporting the nextphase ofArgentina 's
developmentagenda.
The Government's Program
The new administrationofPresident de la Rua isfirmly committedto improving social
and economicperformance within theframework of the ConvertibilityPlan and
MERCOSUR. EnhancingArgentina's competitivenessand promoting new avenues of
growth, including investment in human capital, is a key goal. A prerequisitefor this is to
reduce Argentina 's vulnerabilityto external shocks that not only disrupt growth but inflict
considerablesocial costs on those least able to protect themselves. A major element will
be to reduce country risk as high riskperceptions by the markets burden, via the
increased cost of capital, all sectors of the economy. This impliesreducing the
accumulation ofpublic debt at thefederal and provincial levels and expandingexports.
Faced with a prolonged recession, high unemploymentand high levels ofpoverty, plus a
fiscal deficit of more than 2 percent in 1999, the new administrationplaced its initial

- iv -

priority on thefiscal side, includingbringing thefiscal situation undercontrol and
negotiatinga new program with the IMF. It reachedan early agreementwith the
provinces on stabilizingprovincial transfersand has embarked on a debt-reliefprogram
with the most heavily indebtedprovinces. All of these measuresserved to restore
confidencein the marketsand resulted in a sharp reduction in countryrisk. The
Governmentwas also quick to reaffirm the importanceof MERCOSURand to propose a
majorpiece of legislationon labor reform.
These early measuresform part of a medium term strategyfocused on deepening reform
of the state and making Argentinamore competitive. At thefederal level, there is still a
major adjustmentto make to comply with the law offiscal responsibility,to increase
transparencyand to attackprivate sector tax evasion. Increased investmentin
infrastructureis seen as a keyfor enhancingcompetitivenessand improving coverageof
the poor. Educationspending would be increasinglyfocusedon the poor and health
spending wouldfocus on insurancefor the uninsured,primary health care and
preventionprograms. Finally,social assistance would be revamped to increase
targeting, coverageof criticalgroups, and efficiency.
The Bank Group'sRole
Given the continuingdevelopmentchallengesfaced by Argentina and the success of the
Bank in supporting the Governmentin meetingthem sofar, the WorldBank Group's CAS
for FYO]-04 would continue tofocus on thepoor and promoting equitable,sustained
growth. The Bank would continue to emphasizethree themes: i) enhancingsocial
development, includingpoverty alleviationand human resourcedevelopment;ii)
improving theperformance of the state,particularly at the sub-nationallevel; and iii)
consolidating structural reforms. This strategy has been by and large successful, with
high rates of achievement ofproject objectives,and low levels ofportfolio problems.
IFC 'sfocus would be closely aligned with that of the Bank and include: improvingaccess
to investmentfinancing by companiesthat will creategrowth and employment,activities
which demonstrate tangible benefits of growth and reform, and supportingfrontier
activities which could be replicatedin other WorldBank Group countries. MIGA would
support the strategy through its guaranteeprogram and investment marketingservices.
In view ofArgentina 's high level ofper capita income,thefuture program would aim to
improve a series of economic and social indicatorsdesignedto guide the evolution of the
Bank's role during the comingyears. Theproposed base case lending of $3 billionfor
FYO0-04,as compared to averageannual lending of $1.5 billion during FY97-00, takes
into accountArgentina 's changingneeds and absorptivecapacity. A gradual reduction
in the program would also help to attenuatenegativenetflows when Argentina is still
vulnerable to sharp economic downturnsandproblems in accessingfinancial markets.
Under the base case, lending wouldfocus on provincial reform, governance, education,
continuing reforms in health and improvingservicefor thepoor. Infrastructure
operations would support increasingcompetitivenessby reducinglogistic costs with

-v -

private sectorfinancing, and enhancingaccess by thepoor. Other targetedprograms
would include supportfor the urbanand long neglectedruralpoor.
A high casefor lending would be consideredunder special conditions as in thepast when
Argentina has been hit by an externalshock, assuming satisfactorypolicies were in
place. Such lending would be in the context of coordinatedeffortsamong the Bank, IMF,
and IDB and consistent with the Bank's policies on lending to a single large borrower,
our lending capacity at the time, and burden-sharing. Additional supportfor reforms
would also be consideredas a supplementof $ 500 million to the base case, if there were
to be advances in areas such as deepening of healthsector reforms, consolidationand
simplificationof socialprograms,further reforms in thepension system, or in a new
agreementon transfersto provinces. The move to the high case scenario would take into
accountprogress made in addressingthe issues of the unfinishedreform agenda,
includingprogress towardsa revenue-sharingarrangement,as well as the scope and
budgetary impact of the reforms that could be supportedby the Bank. In turn, a low case
scenario would becomeoperative if there werepolicy slippage and portfolioperformance
were to worsen. The low case program wouldfocus on poverty targeted operations.
Thefollowing questions are suggested as possible issuesfor Board discussion:
-

Is the proposedpace and timing of the reduction in Bank assistance to Argentina
appropriate to the country's current social and economic status?
• Is theproposed assistanceprogram appropriatelytargeted to Argentina 's
developmentchallenges?
* Is the proposed monitoringframework appropriate?

-

vi

-

WashingtonD.C., June 22, 2000

Mr. James D. Wolfensohn
President
The WorldBank Group
Washington,1O.C.
Dear Mr. Wolfensohn:
I am pleased to refer to your memorandumdated May 5 concemingthe document
"Argentina-CountryAssistance Strategy",which will be submittedto considerationof the
Bank's Board of Directorsnext Tuesday,June 27.
In the first place, I would like to thankyou and the Bank team that elaboratedthis
document. This CAS is the result of an extensiveconsultationprocess, which included
not only Governmentofficials,but also a large canvas of our civil society.
Your letter provides us with an excellentopportunityto commenton the way we
see the future of the Argentina-Bankrelationship. I wish to emphasize our agreement
with the general thrust of the strategy. In particular, we agree with the emphasison social
development,on the improvementof public sectorperformance -especially at subnational level- and on the consolidationof structuralreforms.
The Govemment of Argentinaalso wishes to highlight the importanceof the
Bank's support to consolidateits efforts to strengthenpublic finances and improve
economic competitiveness. PresidentDe la Ruiais committed to these objectives since
the beginning of his mandate on December 10, 1999. His administrationconsiders that
these issues are an essential condition for growth and, consequently,a necessary
condition to achieve social equity as well.
The main reason for this special emphasisstems from the fact that, despite
importantreforms carried out in the last decade in different sectors of the economy,the
public sector has not as yet reached a sustainableequilibrium. Moreover, the extemal
situation of Argentinathat -as rightly pointed out in the Bank's report - is a reason of
permanent concern, takes its roots from previous increases in public expenditureand the
accumulationof fiscal imbalancesthat occurredduring great part of the 1990's. These
developmentswere concealedby favorableconditionsthat generated a swift increase in
the economicactivity, and by the widespreadprivatizationprogramthat provided fiscal
resources. Today, under a different internationalpanorama and in the absence of
extraordinaryrevenues for the public sector, the constraintsfaced by the present
administration emerge in all clarity.

- vii -

In this context, our Governmentconsiders that the relationshipof our country
with the Bank should not experiencesignificantchangesin our next operationalprogram.
Poverty is still widespreadin Argentina and the averageper capita income conceals
striking regional differences in the distributionof products and wealth. In this sense, we
wish to share with you the need to face the operationalprogram of the next triennium
with an open mind. We hope to count with the Bank's support to consolidatethe
achievementsalready attained and to complementthe agenda of the present
administration.
I would like to stress the fact that the relativeparticipation of our country in
financing operationsthrough multilateralcredit organizations,particularly the World
Bank, is decreasing gradually,while our access to financial markets is increasing.
In responseto the consultationregardingdisclosureof this report, I am herewith
conveying our authorization,and I would greatly appreciate your including the text of
this letter in it.
I have asked our ExecutiveDirectorto read this letter at the time the CAS
document is submitted to the considerationof the Bank's Board of Directors.
Very truly yours,
Jose Luis Machinea
Minister of Economy and Finance

viii

-

MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONALBANKFOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND
DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVEDIRECTORSON A
COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY
OF THE WORLDBANK GROUP
FOR THE
ARGENTINEREPUBLIC
A. ECONOMICAND SOCIALPERFORMANCE
EconomicReform and Growth
1. Since the launch of the ConvertibilityPlan in 1991,the Argentineeconomy has been
transformedthrough the establishmentof a currencyboard arrangementthat has provided
price stability. This was part of a sweeping set of reforms duringthe 1990sthat altered
the monetary system, improvedfiscal and tax policies, liberalizedtrade, and reformedthe
public sector includingprivatizationand changesto the social securitysystem.
2. All of this was intendedto reversethe long-termtrend of slow growth, state
domination,poor labor productivity,low domestic savings,weak investment,high
volatility, and chronic inflationthat the country had suffered for the previous 25 years.
Public institutions in health and educationhad deterioratedas did the judiciary and tax
administration. Importantly,the extendedperiod of poor performance severely eroded
confidence, resulting in large savings held abroad. Externalfinancing both for the private
and public sector dominatedthel 970s and contributedto the 1982debt crisis, exacerbated
by the war with the United Kingdom.
3. Attempts at stabilizingthe economy,with Bank and Fund support,were made in the
1980s but none was able to rein in the public sectorin the face of resistance from the
opposition,unions and other interested groups. Each time, inflationreturned and surged
to higher levels. Duringthe 1980s,the public sectordeficit averaged over 8 percent of
GDP and investment fell from a high of 22 percent of GDP to a low of 10 percent in 1989.
Hyperinflationbroke out in 1989. Tax collectionsamounted to no more than 16 percent
of GDP, and MI as a share of the economy fell to only 5 percent, as the local currency lost
value and funds were withdrawn from the banking system. With real wages not able to
keep up with inflation,poverty rose to over 40 percent of the population in 1989.
Nonetheless,these earlier efforts at reformstarted the process of opening and deregulating
Argentina's economy and began the debate on the role of the state.
4. Another attempt at reforn began in 1989and the results have been dramatic.
Argentinahas experiencedstrong average economicgrowth in the 1990s,as compared to
zero growth in the 1980s. The size of the economyexpanded from $141 billion in 1990to

1

$282 billion in 1999,despite being hit by externalshocks that causedtwo serious
recessions. Instead of experiencinghyperinflation,Argentinahas now one of the world's
lowest rates of inflation: consumerprice inflationwas less than one percent in 1998,and
wholesale prices actually fell by about 6 percent. Investmenthas recovered, and
productivityrapidly increased,respondingto the new economic signals. With the
ConvertibilityPlan, the economy quickly remonitizedand, spurred by the Tequila crisis in
1995,the banking system has been strengthenedthrough a mixture of improvementsin
regulation and supervision,privatization,restructuringand consolidation. The role of the
state has furthermorebeen evolvingto take into account this new economicregime. The
Federal Government's deficit droppedto 1.4 percent of GDP in 1998, even after taking
into account the transitionalcosts for pension reformwhich amountsto about I percent of
GDP. As a result of privatization,public employmentfell by at about 300,000 while
decentralizationof secondaryeducationand public hospitalstransferred284,000
employeesto the provinces. Tax reforms removeddistortionsand reduced tax handles
and a new public sector financialmanagementsystem was implemented.
5. After years of inflation,however, the domesticcapital market remains thin and the
rate of monetization,low. Argentinesare reportedto have as much as $90 billion in
savings abroad while domestic credit - at about $77 billion or 27 percent of GDP-is
small in comparison. As a result, the Governmentand major industriescontinue to
depend on the internationalcapital markets for term financing and smaller firms have an
even harder time accessing credit. Total foreign debt that started to accumulateduring the
1970s now accounts for about 51 percent of GDP, downfrom the worst level of about 100
percent in 1989,but still almost twice domesticcredit. The lack of domestic credit
constitutes a serious bottleneck for small and medium firm and retards developmentof
mortgage, municipal and other specializeddebt markets. The cost of capital associated
with high risk perceptions of Argentina, moreover,constitutes a drag on the economy and
its ability to compete. Importantly,Argentina has still not achieved fiscal balance-with
notable deterioration in 1999 by both the federal and provincialgovernments-leading to
high demands for deficit financing which can crowd out the private sector.
6. This situation leaves Argentina vulnerableto externalshocks and changes in market
perceptions of country risk: Standardand Poor rates Argentina at BB, as compared to Afor Chile and BBB- for Uruguay. Although earlier efforts loweredtotal debt and debt
service, with the Brady plan in 1993, and increased the maturities of public external debt

to about 9.7 years on average, Argentina's external debt and dependence on external
capital flows to finance investmentleave the economy exposed. This vulnerability to
external shocks not only disrupts growth but can inflict considerablesocial costs on those
least able to protect themselves,as is evident the two recessions that Argentina has
suffered in the 1990s. In both cases, after the Tequilacrisis in 1995 and the Russia/Brazil
crises of 1998-99,unemploymentrose sharply and poverty increased with both indicators
slow to recover even when the economy reactivates.
7. Moreover, while many social indicatorshave improvedin the past ten years (for
example, infant mortalityhas dropped from 25 deaths per 1000births in 1991to about 19
deaths per 1000 births in 1998),poverty levels have stubbornly stayed high. The Bank's

2

latest estimatesput poverty at about 29 percent of the urban population. It is likely much
higher in the rural areas. This situation is compoundedby rising income inequalityand
high unemployment,especiallyfor the unskilled,indicatingthat the benefits of growth
have not been widely shared. Thus, Argentina still has a large social agenda to fulfil.
External Shocks
8. During the 1990s,Argentinahas suffered the consequencesof two serious external
shocks. The first came in late 1994-1995after the devaluationof the Mexicanpeso. The
economy shrankby 2.8 percent in 1995but followingthis crisis, strong, investment-led
growth returned. Real GDP growthwas 5.5 percent in 1996and an impressive 8.1 percent
in 1997. Supportfrom the Bank Group,IDB and IMF were critical in helping Argentina
to recover and to implementcontinuingreforms as well as launch importanttargeted
social programs. The second test occurredin 1998-99,as a result of the combined effects
of the downturn in East Asia, the devaluationof the Russian ruble and the Brazilian real,
and deteriorationof commodityprices After growth of 6.6 percent in the first half of
1998, growth fell to -0.6 percent in the fourth quarter of 1998. For that year as a whole,
GDP growth was 3.9 percent. Even though the economywent into recessionin late 1998,
Argentina's commitmentto prudent macroeconomicmanagementand the discipline
inherent in its currency board arrangementgeneratedconfidence and Argentinawas
among the first emerging economiesto regain access to internationalcapital markets. The
Bank's special support late in 1998played a significantrole in this recovery (see Box 1).
Recent EconomicDevelopments
9. The econfomicdownturn in 1999turned out to be deeper and longer than expected,
especially in light of the progress made in Brazil to stabilize its economy. Overall,
Argentina's GDP is estimatedto have declinedby 3.1 percent in 1999. Unemployment,
after falling to about 12 percent from the high of 18 percent reached in 1996,increased to
almost 15 percent. The volume of exports remainedfairly stable (although prices had
fallen) as Argentina was able to find substitutemarkets for its exports. Because of the
sharp contraction in domesticactivity, the current account balance improved slightly to
4.3 percent of GDP, due to even larger declines for imports(particularly capital goods).
Inflation remains extremely low, with deflationduring 1999 and during the first months of
2000.

3

Box 1: SSAL/REPO and Policy Based Guarantee
On the heels of the Asia and Russia crises, the Bank extended in November of 1998 the Special Structural Adjustment
Loan (SSAL) and the Repurchase Facility Support (REPO) with the aim of helping Argentina reduce its vulnerability
to extemal financing shocks, while simultaneously increasing its capacity for sustainable and equitable growth.
Specifically, the SSAL/REPO was intended to: (i) facilitate the reentry of Argentina to the intemational capital
markets and avoid the great social and economic costs associated with the altemative of drasticallv contracting
expenditures and depleting reserves as a result of capital flight; (ii) protect vulnerable groups during a period of high
uncertainty; (iii) add, through the REPO, to the lines of defense of the banking system in order to deter and, if need be,
withstand liquidity shocks; and (iv) continue Argentina's successful reform program, particularly with a focus on the
long-term issues of savings and capital market development, efficiency in the financial sector, and public policies with
respect to regulation, tax and fiscal equity, social spending and human capital.
The Brazilian real devaluation in early 1999 and pre-electoral uncertainties in mid-1999 combined to aggravate
Argentina's access to financial markets. While Argentina continued to be successful in tapping the markets,
increasingly it was forced to accept smaller and more costly bond issues. Given the importance of external financing,
the growing concems about the Year 2000 problem for the markets, and the need to provide for a smooth transition to
the new administration at the end of 1999, a Policy-Based Guarantee (a first operation of this kind in the Bank) was
approved in September 1999. This enhancement facilitated Argentina's access to new markets, particularly
institutional investors that require investment grade. The transaction was successfully concluded in October 1999 and
Argentina raised $1.5 billion in zero-coupon bonds, netting approximately $1.2 billion. The policy framework for the
guarantee was the ongoing SSAL which is being implemented satisfactorily; its second tranche was released in
September of 1999. Funding of the guarantee of $250 million was reallocated from the second tranche of the SSAL
and thus did not increase the Bank's exposure to Argentina.
The closing date of the SSAL has been extended to allow the new administration to reconfirm its commitment to the
program and to meet conditions of the final third tranche of $ 500 million. Discussions regarding compliance are
underway and the Govemment expects to request release of the tranche during the first quarter of FY0 1. In addition,
discussions are underway on the future of the REPO given its contingent nature and the fact that it loses effectiveness
once the grace period of the loan is over.

10. Fiscal performance deteriorated during 1999 and the fiscal program went off track in
the latter part, ending the year with a deficit of about $7.35 billion, considerably higher
than the target of $5 billion agreed with the IMF. The higher deficit was the result of
higher interest costs, the duration of the recession, and a general weakening of fiscal
discipline during the election year. Provincial governments encountered similar
conditions and they ended the year with a deficit of about $4.5 billion, almost twice the
deficit in 1997. In total the consolidated public sector fiscal deficit amounted to about 4.2
percent of GDP, excluding privatization receipts. As a result, the new administration took
swift action in December 1999 to restore order in the fiscal accounts.
11. Since the restructuring in the post-1 995 crisis, confidence in the banking system
remained strong. The system maintained deposits in both pesos and dollars, exhibiting
growth since the beginning of 1999. (In contrast, during the Tequila crisis, 18 percent of
deposits were lost and a significant number of banks were forced to close or restructure.)
As of end 1999, international reserves increased by 4.9 percent compared to the end of
1998, ending the year at $ 26.3 billion. However, credit growth to the private sector has
been flat, badly curtailing local investment. Tightening interest policy in the United
States, uncertainty in this election year, and the Y2K scare caused another rise in spreads
on Argentine foreign debt and in domestic interest rates.

4

12. Sincethe end of 1999,there are signs that the economy is slowly regaining its
footing,with industrial productiongrowing (yearto year) 2.4 percent in January and 3.3
percent in February 2000. Exports also grew by 16 percent in January 2000, compared to
January 1999, with strong demand from Brazil. There are excellentprospects for a good
harvest. Financial market indicators-the stock market, spreads on public debt, and local
inter-bank rates-have improved and are near the levels of mid 1997. There is renewed
interest in domestic credit, particularlymortgages. Nevertheless,consumer demand
remains low and tax collectionshave not been restoredto their 1999 levels.
Unemploymentis slowly edging downbut job creationremains weak. Growth for 2000 is
expected to be 2 percent (see Table 1).
Medium-TermProspects
13. Argentina'saverage growth rate during the 1990s was about 4.6 percent spurred by
the stabilizationof the economyand productivitygains. The economy is still going
through a transformation,as the private sectorspecializesin areas of Argentina's
comparativeadvantage. On the extemal front, trends are favorable: the real bilateral
exchange rate between Argentinaand Brazil is expectedto readjust somewhatin
Argentina'sfavor, commodityprices are expectedto improve slightly, and access to
foreigncapital markets has so far been favorable. Trade with Brazil has rebounded in the
past several months but there are lingeringuncertaintiesover MERCOSURin the
aftermath of the real devaluationand the resulting impacton Argentina's competitive
position. Continuing accessto intemationalcapital will be critical, due to Argentina's
large stock of external debt. Traditionally,there has been a high correlation between
spreads on foreign borrowingand domestic rates.
14. With relatively benign externalconditionsand adequateprogress on reforms,
Argentina can return to average growth rates close to 4.5 percent, with low inflation, a
gradual reduction in the fiscal deficit and gradual improvementin the external current
account balance (Table 1). Total debt is still expectedto rise, before falling as a share of
GDP in the coming years. These trends would allow countryrisk perceptions to fall, and
Argentina's access to intemationalcapital markets improve. There would be an attendant
reduction in the cost of capital making access by domestic, especially smaller firms, more
affordable. The expected reduction in the fiscal deficit would concomitantlyease
crowding out of the private sector in domestic market, stimulating investment.

5

Table 1: Key MacroeconomicIndicators
(Percentof GDP) a/
1998
(actual)

1999
(est.)

t000)
2

Ave.

(proj.)

2001-03

National Accounts
GDP Avg. Annual Growth
Total Investment
National Savings
Foreign Savings

3.9
19.9
15.1
4.8

-3.1
19.1
14.7
4.3

2.1
19.3
15.5
3.9

4.3
19.9
15.2
4.7

Public Sector-p'
Primary Surplus
Interest Payments
Domestic
Foreign "
Balance (- deficit)

0.8
2.2
0.1
2.2
-1.4

0.3
2.9
0.1
2.8
-2.6

1.6
3.5
0.1
3.4
-1.9

2.5
3.1
0.1
3.0
-0.6

Balance of Payments
Trade Balance
Current Account Balance
Capital Account
Public Sector
Private Sector

-2.5
-4.8
5.7
3.1
2.6

-1.7
-4.3
5.1
3.9
1.2

-1.3
-3.9
5.7
1.6
4.1

-1.7
-4.7
5.2
0.6
4.6

298.1

282.8

286.1

317.80

Memo: GDP (US$ billion)

a! Unlessotherwisestated, all figures for publicfinancesand balanceof paymentsare net
b/ NationalAdministration
c/ Includesquasi-fiscalbalanceof CentralBank.

Social Performance
15. Macroeconomicperformanceand structural reforms have had a major impacton
social development in Argentina. Overallwelfare has improved: per capita GDP, which
fell over 20 percent during the 1980s,rose considerablyand by 1998had increased by 30
percent over 1988. Importantly,stabilityand economicgrowth brought about a recovery
from the worst conditions faced in 1989 and 1990but could not bring povertyback to its
previous levels as shown in Table 2.

6

Table 2: Long Term Trends in Poverty, Employment, Growth and Inflation (1980-1998)
PovertyRate
PovertyRate
Unemployment
Inflation
PerCapitaGDP
BuenosAires
UrbanAreas
(% of laborforce)
(% increase)
(1980=100)
1980
8.0
2.6
100.8
100.0
1985
16.0
6.1
672.2
83.9
1988
33.1
6.3
343.0
86.7
1989
38.1
7.6
3079.5
79.4
1990
41.2
41.5
7.6
2314.0
77.0
1991
26.4
30.5
6.1
171.7
84.1
1992
18.7
24.2
6.9
24.9
90.9
1993
16.9
21.8
9.6
10.6
95.0
1994
17.0
21.6
11.0
4.2
101.3
1995
22.6
27.2
17.3
3.4
96.1
1996
25.5
30.1
16.5
0.2
99.4
1997
25.2
29.4
14.7
0.5
106.6
1998
24.9
29.3
13.5
0.9
109.8
Note: Unemployment
priorto 1990refersto GreaterBuenosAires only
Source:INDEC.PovertyRatescalculatedfrom EPHdata by Bankstaff

16. As shown in Table 3, the 1990shave also seen a deteriorationin income equality.
The share of income receivedby the lowest 20 percent has declined since 1990, so that in
1998 they received less than 4 percent of GDP while the upper 20 percent increased their
share from 51 percent to 54 percent. If income distribution had remained constant in the
1990s,the poverty rate would have been 25 percent in 1998,instead of 29 percent.
Table 3: Income Distribution,1990-98
(percent)
Gini Coefficient
Upper20%
Lower20%

1990

1991

0.46
50.90
4.55

0.46
51.40
4.50

1992 1993
0.45 0.46
50.40 50.90
4.85 4.50

1994 1995
0.46 0.47
51.10 52.20
4.55 4.30

1996

1997

Q.48 0.48
53.00 53.20
4.05
4.00

1998
0.49
54.25
3.80

17. The factors causing a worseningof income distribution and poverty levels are
complex but an importantone is the change in labor demand which has depressed wages
for unskilled workers while increasing them for those with better skills. During the 1980s,
there was an accumulationof excess employmentin all sectors, as the economy stagnated
but total employmentgrew by 28 percent. With lower protectionand cost of capital in the
early 1990s,the comparativeadvantage shifted in capital's favor. This led to demand for
skilled workers and increased the wages of those with secondaryand higher education.
As a result, 40 percent of the change in the Gini is due to differences in education. The
income of professionalshas grownby about 5.6 percent per year over the 1990-98period;
skilled wages, by 3.6 percent;and wages for unskilled workers,zero. For those with two
years of schooling, the returns to educationhave dropped from 6.8 to 5 percent and for
those with 18 years of schooling,the returns have gone from 9.8 to 13.7percent.

7

The Poor'
18. The poor in Argentina are those less able to compete,those with the least skills and
the least experience. The poor are also the ones with the greatest family obligations and
dependents. Lookingat the urban populationonly, the poor:
* have significantlylarger families(4.6 vs. 3.1), as a result,43 percent of children aged
0-4 live below the povertyline;
* have younger familieswith a much higherdependencyratio (3.0 vs. 1.4);
* have much higher unemploymentrates (twicethe rate of the non-poor);
* have fewer years of schooling(about25% less), and are less likely have formal work;
* typically are employed in constructionif they are men; servicesif they are women;
* include the indigent (definedas those lacking sufficientmoney to afford a basic food
basket), who representabout 7 percent of the population;
* possess a relativelyhigh standardof living: 78 percent own a refrigerator;85 percent
own a television; 59 percent own a washing machine; 19 percent own a car; and only
4 percent lack electricity; but
* most live in difficult circumstancesin poor neighborhoodsthat lack basic
infrastructureand often live in areas lacking adequatedrainage,near garbage dumps
or other marginal areasprone to floods.
19. Whenconsulted for the recent poverty assessment,most of the urban poor consider
not having work as their biggest problem,even abovemeeting basic needs. This shows
how importanthaving a job is, not just for the income generatedbut also the social status
and implied security. Nevertheless,whileemploymentis critical, it is not the only factor
explainingpoverty as povertytrends correlatewith both unemploymentand wages. The
trend in wages for unskilled workers,as noted in para. 17, goes a long way in explaining
why poverty levels have increased: at present, unskilledworkers earningthe average
wage with the average number of dependentswould be at the indigent line and a typical
worker in the industrial sectorwith dependentscouldalso be below the poverty line.
20. Moreover, the poor face much more insecure employmentwhen they havejobs and
are more likely to have periods when they are not working. The labor market in Argentina
is dualistic with about 55 percent of employment"formal" in the sense that workers are
covered by social security and labor legislationprotection. The remaining 45 percent can
be divided between self-employedand informal salaried workers; the latter are more
likely to be poor. The bulk of unemploymentin Argentina, in fact, has originatedin the
informal sector which lacks unemploymentinsurance,health insurance and pensions
putting these workersat risk. The majority of the unemployedare young, with
unemploymentrates for workers in their teens and 20s twice as high as for those in their
40s and 50s. In addition, since 1988,participationrates have risen by about three
'See the Bank'smost recentPovertyAssessmentfor Argentina,entitledPoorPeoplein a RichCountry,
reportnumber19992-AR,datedMarch23,2000. Thesedatareferonlyto thoselivingin urbancentersof
5000personsor more;officialhouseholdsurveysdo not includethe ruralpopulation.Workis presently
underwayunderthejoint Bank-IBDregionalprojectto extendthe coverof regularsurveysas wellas
improvement
povertyrelatedstatistics.

8

percentagepoints, and a large element of that has been the increase by women. It is
estimated that this alone accounts for 25 percent of the increase in unemployment.
21. These statistics mask sharp differencesamong the provinces. The City of Buenos
Aires stands out with an income per capita of about $ 25,000, as comparedto the poorest
province-Formosa-with $ 2,500 per capita. Income distribution varies: the Gini
coefficientfor Jujuy, Argentina's third poorest province,stands at 0.53, as compared to
0.40 for Santa Fe, the provincewith the most equal income distribution. Generally,
poverty rates are substantiallyhigher in the Northwest(46%) and Northeast (49%). These
provincesalso tend to have higherpercentages of rural populationsand indigenous
peoples: a survey of rural poverty in three provincesshowedthat poverty rates among the
rural populations can be exceedinglyhigh--as much 70 percent (see Box 2).
Box 2: The ForgottenPoor of the Rural Areas and the Indigenous
Most govemment surveys ignorerural areas. Since the country is 89% urban, the absence of the rural poor in the
overall poverty rate does not make a huge difference, but the effect is often to ignorethe special problems of rural
poverty. Recent surveys for three provinces (Salta,Misiones, and San Juan) give us some insight. The weighted
average poverty rate for these areas is about 49%, with a rate of indigenceof 19%. The rural poor are less likely to be
farmers as comparedto the non-poorrural populationand are more likely to be wage workers, self-employedor
unemployed. Unemploymentis high in rural areas, about 19% overall. The poor are more likely to be illiterate,drop
out of school early, and show lower gains from their schooling. In general,the poor are net consumers of food, so that
lower food prices raise welfare. Poor farmers have less land, but have higher productivitythrough intensive
production. They generally lack clear titles to their land,have little or no savings, and are less likely to have borrowed
money. Without credit, they tend to use fewer inputs, and have lower productivityper unit of labor. Even less is know
about the indigenous population in Argentina. A recent Bank supported study estimated that they number about one
million people, with at least half living in isolatedrural areas. (Better data should be available with the year 2000
National Census.) The study was part of a largereffort under an IDF grant to integrate indigenous peoples in the
Bank's activities. This effort is bearing fruit as a LIL for IndigenousPeoples has been included in the FY00 program.

B. MAIN DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
Poverty and Human Resource Development
22. Argentina faces a complex set of social problemsthat are not easily resolved in the
short term. With modest growth of about 3.3 percent per year over the next ten years, the
poverty rates could be expectedto fall to about 20-22 percent. Higher growth, close to 5
percent per year, could bring that rate down to around 17 percent. But this also depends
on what happens with income inequity as continued deterioration of Argentina's Gini
coefficient could add several percentagepoints to the final outcome. Also, reducing
unemployment would clearlyhave a positive impacteven though it would not eliminate
poverty: reducing the unemploymentrate by half could take several percentagepoints off
the poverty rate and have the greatest impact on the poorest of the poor.2
23. The main factors explainingthese results relate to the change in labor demand to
those with high skills, with a commensuratedepression in the wages for unskilled
workers. The supply of unskilledworkers is further compoundedby high drop-out rates
2

Theseestimateswere derivedas partof the recentPovertyAssessment.
9

for poor youths and increased participation. At the same time, higher dependencyratios
for low income workers add to the shear numbers of poor, mainly children. Continued
emphasison educationis thus criticalto poverty reductionover the long run.
24. Another dimensionof the problem is that Argentina's continuedvulnerability to
external shocksexacerbatesthe risks that the unemployed,low income workers and their
dependentsface. This also heightensthe need for programsto mitigate and manage social
risks, using scarce resources which instead could be invested in long-termhuman capital
development. Loweringcounty risk would in turn lower the cost of capital and create a
virtuous circleof stimulatinginvestmentand creatingemployment,particularlyin sectors
such as constructionwhich employslow skilled workers. The impact on the poor would
not so much be in terms of wage rates but in the overall demand for labor.
25. Another dimensionis the considerableinequity in public services. While demands
continue to be very large, especiallyin areas such as education,health, housing, water and
sanitation,and urban services,much can be done to providebetter services through
reorientingexisting public programs and creatingspaced for private delivery and
financing. There are many examples of where this is possible. Finally, there will remain
vulnerable groups who face particularchallenges. Ways of better serving these groups
and helping them to managing social risks are needed. Increasingly,these programs need
to take into account regional differencesand disparities.
26. Social Protection. Argentina has one of the highest levels of per capita public social
spending in Latin America,providing morethan countries such as Chile, Costa Rica and
Uruguay. Social spending has risen in importanceover time, from about 15 percent of
GDP in the early 1980s,to about 18 percent today, taking over the fiscal space created by
privatization. There are three main components: social insurance(57%), universal social
sector programs mainly educationand health (36%), and programs specificallytargeted to
the poor (7%). While the share of total spendingtargeted to the poor is relatively small,
the poor benefit in varying degreesfrom all social programs. The lowest 20 percent in the
income distribution receive 22 percent of total social spending, and pay 7 percent of all
taxes. People in the upper quintile pay 47 percent of taxes and receive only 19 percent of
social sector spending. However, social insurance,being a contributoryprogram, is
regressive as is the tax system. That said, incidenceanalysis indicatesthat, overall,
Argentina's social programs are pro-poor and the Governmentestimatesthat they reduce
the indigent rate by 2 percentagepoints, the poverty rate by as much as 14 percentage
points, and the Gini coefficient by 8 percentagepoints.3
27. Argentina has numeroustargeted social assistance programs: food, nutrition, health,
employment,training, education,shelter, clothing, income subsidies, and other emergency
programs plus those aimed at strengtheningcommunities. This assistance appears to be
strongly pro-poor: 65 percent of benefits go to the poor and 47 percent goes to the poorest
20 percent. In contrast,the highest quintile gets only 2.4 percent of the benefits. In some
present, household surveys in Argentina which are used to measure poverty are based on income, not consumption.
Hence. the impact of social programs-especially those which provide in-kind benefits-is not taken into account in
estimating the poverty rate. As indicated above, the differences can be considerable
3At

10

cases, results have been very impressive: an evaluationof the TRABAJARprogram,
supported by the Bank, estimated that 75 percent of benefits went to people in the bottom
20 percent, and 40 percent of the benefits reached the lowest 5 percent.
28. More problems emerge in terms of coverage and the pro-cyclical bias in social
spending. First, about 75 percent of the poor do not receive any public assistance and
over half got neither public nor private help. For instance, food and nutrition programs for
young children and senior citizens are one of the most importantareas. Of the most
vulnerable group to long-termnegative effects of malnutrition--the children aged 0-2 in
the lowest quintile--only 44 percent receivebenefits from public nutrition programs, even
though they receive 70 percent of benefits. Secondly,government spending is procyclical and rises and falls with GDP changes. This situation is even worse for the social
sectors and, whereas targetedprograms shouldbe part of a social safety net that expands
during a crisis, they fluctuate even more than total social spending: a five percent drop in
GDP is associated with a 9 percent drop in targeted social sector spending.
29. Education. Argentina's educationsystem has been one of the most advanced in the
region with a literacy rate of 97 percent for the adult population,universal primary
enrollment, and about 20 percent of the population betweenthe ages of 20 to 25 enrolled
in higher education. Yet, Argentina under-performsin certain key indicators. The
secondarygraduation rate in Argentina is 52 percent, compared to an average rate for the
OECD countries of 80 percent. Of 100 students entering primary school, only 40 will
enter the last year of secondary school, 35 will enroll in university and only seven will
graduate. A survey in 1993 indicatedthat 40 percent of students completing secondary
education did not read and write up to acceptable standards. Another survey in 1992
showed that 80 percent of secondarystudents had below average skills in mathematics.
While expenditures have increased,recurrent spending often represents95 percent of the
total, with little going to investment.
30. During the last five years, with Bank and IDB support, Argentinahas started an
ambitious program aimed at transformingthe education system with a new structure and
curriculum,increased access at preschool and secondarylevels, increased quality
(evaluation, standards,teacher training, informationsystems), more autonomyto the
provinces regarding their educationpolicies, and targeted investments to improve
infrastructureand pedagogicmaterials for the poor. Progress made by the reform is fragile
and Argentina needs to deepen the transformationin the education sector to:
*
*
*
*
*
*

Address the growing and changing demandfor secondaryeducation
Finance the next phase of educationtransformation
Stimulate private initiatives (see para. 26 of the Private Sector Strategy, Annex A)
Prepare the teachers better and increase their participationin the reform process
Promote and sustain change at the school level
Improve the relevanceand efficiencyof higher education

31. Education and the Poor. Overall, the poor benefit from public education spending
more than the non-poor, in part because richer familiestend to send their children to

11

private schools. The poor tend to benefit more from primary education;secondary
educationtends to benefit slightly more the middle class. The major distortion comes in
tertiary or universityeducation: the lowest quintilereceives only 10 percent of the
benefits, with the richest quintilereceiving34 percent. At the same time private
enrollmentis lower at the universitylevel. Private enrollmentsequaled 25 percent of total
primary and secondaryenrollmentin 1996but only 14 percent at the university level.
32. Performanceindicators,such as dropoutrates and repetition,are sharply
differentiatedby income groups;dropout rates increasemarkedly for the poor after seven
years of education(see Box 3). Only 24 percent of students in the lowest quintile
complete secondaryschool, as comparedto 76 percent for the upper quintile;37 percent
of poor youth aged 14to 18 are out of school. In addition,poor children are more likely
to be older than otherprimary school children due to late entry and repetition.
Box3: Droppingout of School
The estimated rate of return to completing primary education is only 2.5%, while for secondary education it is about
10% and for tertiary education about 29%. Why do many children dropout of school early if the retums are so high?
The 1997 Social Development Survey found that about half of the dropouts cited "personal motives" of which 77
percent say lack of interestwas the main cause. A common interpretationis that school is boring. Yet, only a few of the
respondents blame the schoolsand a small percentage find educationuseless. About 43% gave "economic difficulties"
as a reason, of which 73% reported that they left school because they needed to work. Economic difficulty is much
more a problem for the low income families(50% for the lowest quintile vs. 29% for the upper quintile).
An examination of school enrollment of 15-19 year olds reveals that parental education and income have significant
positive effects on schooling. Distance to public secondary school remains a significant cost that discourages some
children: children in the first quintile live further from school than those in the fifth quintile. The unemploymentrate
among householdheads is negatively related to enrollment. This suggests that in areas where the unemploymentrate is
high, children's human capital formation suffers. Further analysis reveals that the rate of return to education is
probably lower for individuals with poor parents, as measured by the education of the head of the family. Students
whose parents have only primary education have an incremental rate of return from a year of secondary educationthat
is 60 percent lower that those whose parents have tertiary education.
The fact that the poor have lower rates of return from the same educationmight explain changesin enrollment At the
while enrollmentrates
secondary level, among poor students enrollmentrates between 1992and 1997have decreased,
for other deciles have increased. For higher education,the shift is even more pronounced. Hence, the richer groups are
responding to higher retums to education, while the poorer groups are not, perpetuatingthe gap between rich and poor.

33. The Government's two main programsto reduce inequitiesat primary and secondary
levels turn out to be quite effectiveat redressing inequitiesand this investmentcan be
easilyjustified (see Box 4). The Pacto Federal Educativohelps provinces meet the
demands of extending mandatory educationfrom 7 to 10 years, introducedin 1993 .
Because most children who are not enrolled in secondaryeducationare poor, this effort is
likely to benefit the poor in particular. The Plan Social Educativo(PSE) is targeted
directly to schools serving such children. It improvesschool infrastructure;targets
indigenous students,rural schools, adult and special education;and finances scholarships
for poor children in secondaryschool. About 60 percent of PSE beneficiaries come from
the first quintile and the two lowest income quintiles account for over 80 percent but only
about half of the children are covered.

12

Box 4: Does it Pay to Invest in Education?
Whilewe didnot evaluatethe PSE programdirectly,it is possibleto makesomeindirectestimatesof the retumson
investmentin secondaryschools.It is oftenarguedthatoneway of raisingretumsto educationis for thegovemmentto
investmoreper studentso thatschoolchildrencanbe providedwithbetterteachers,educationalmaterials,equipment,
and classroomenvironment.Basedon estimatesfromregionaldata,we estimatethat a 10 percentincreasein public
secondaryexpenditurewouldproducea 3.5% increasein the lifetimewage of a 20-29 year old with a complete
secondaryeducation.Thus, an expenditureof 800 pesosper studentwouldproducean annualreturnof about200
pesosperyear,or an internalrateof returnof about25%,clearlya productiveinvestmentthatwouldreducepoverty

34. Health. Health care spending in Argentinais the highest in Latin America at about
ten percent of GDP and overall health indicatorshave improved markedly: in 1995, life
expectancy stood at 76 years, 12 more than 1960, infant mortality was at 19per 1,000
births in 1998 comparedto over 30 in the 1980s,and matemal mortality dropped to 14 per
10,000births in 1995. However,these rates are not as good than those of other countries
in the same income range. Chile, with lower health spending ($295 per capita in 1994),
had an infant mortalityrate of 12per 1,000live births and a maternalmortality ratio of 6.5
per 10,000 births in 1995. In addition,national averageshide significantvariations
between income groups and regions: communicable,maternal,prenatal and nutritional
conditions account for 19 percent of years of life lost in lower income provincesbut only
5 percent in higher income provinces. Life expectancybetween the richest provinces and
the poorest differs by about four years.
35. Argentina is in the midst of an epidemiologicaltransformationand concurrentlyhas
an emergenceof non-communicableproblems while combatingcommunicablediseases
such as tuberculosis, diarrhea, dengue fever,and AIDS. It is also in the midst of a reform
process to improve quality, equity and cost effectiveness. Recent efforts, with Bank
support, have contributedto a decline in the infant and maternal mortality ratios, for
example, but the country has not made sufficientprogress with respect to preventable
diseases that disproportionatelyaffect the poor.
36. Under investmentin the public system has led to a deterioration in infrastructureand
absence of modern practices and health protocols. This has resulted in a drift of the public
health delivery system towards a hospital-basedmodel with public hospitals crowded with
out-patient visits that could be handled at lesser cost - for both providers and patients - in
primary care centers and by family doctors. The numberof family doctors has increased
over the last decade, mostly to act gatekeepersfor health insurance, but the lack of a
supporting policy is a deterrentto better first level care. Also, an efficient surveillance
system and a strategy for health educationand promotionare at the developmentalstage,
with recent Bank support. Ministries of health are generallyill equipped to carry out
importantfunctions such as regulating insurance,setting standards and quality assurance.
37. The pending agenda of reforms includes:
* Improving equity among Obras Sociales by ensuring that those covering high-risk,
poor populations can finance the standardbenefits by regular updating of enrollment
and use of additional risk-adjustmentcriteria (eg. family size, age, sex).

13

Strengtheningthe Health InsuranceSupervisoryAgency so that it can effectively
enforce compliancewith regulationsby all health insurance funds.
* Consolidatingthe market. The number of national Obras decreasedfrom 360 in 1994
to 290 in 1999, but many still have less than 10,000beneficiaries.
* Finally, actions have so far failed to ensure the financial and technical sustainability
of INSSJP.
*

38. Health Care and the Poor. As elsewhere,the poor in Argentina carry a
disproportionatepart of the burden of disease and are disproportionatelyaffected by
diseases that could be controlled. Because of their accessto public hospitals, the poor are
adequatelyprotectedagainst major health expenditures,but they rely on low quality
services and often have to pay a lot for medicines. Thirty-sevenpercent of the population
and 62 percent of the poor are not covered by health insurance. Of those not covered by
any health insuranceplan include most of the unemployedand informal sector workers.
In public hospitals,the poor tend not to get the same quality of care as those in the upper
income groups. Moreover,if health insurancebeneficiariesneed interventionswhich are
not included in their benefitspackage, or when they do not want to pay the insurance copayment, they can seek free care at the public hospital. This constitutesa significant
subsidy from the public to the private sectors and from the poor to the non-poor.
39. The next step in health reform is to improveoutcomes consistentwith the level of
spending by integratingthe system, achievinguniversal participation(most notably by the
uninsured poor), increasing equity and solidarity, at the same time as improvingefficiency
and quality. One of the biggest challengeswill be to overcomethe gaps in equity by
extending coverage to the uninsured, especiallythe poor, unemployed or are those in the
informal sector (see Box 5). Another will be to shift the paradigm from hospital based
service to networks of providers, including primary care. The objective is to both improve
health care for the poor and raise service quality by creating"choice and voice".
Box5: HealthInsurancefor theUninsured
With a view to universalizinghealth insurance coverage,the Government is piloting, with Bank assistance, formal and
explicit health coverage to the uninsured in three provinces. Health insurancefor the poor would initiate a process of
switching to a more efficient, equitable, and transparent (demand) subsidy scheme. The proposed financing mechanism
would both help improve the targetingof subsidiestowards the poor, and link provider payment to service production.
The switch from supply to demand subsidizationof health care for the poor also lays the foundationfor providing
public hospitals with an incentiveto provide appropriatecare to the poor and, in the medium run, for offering a choice
of insurance carriers and providers. The development of health insurance for the poor is already attracting wide interest
and several provinces, in addition to the three pilot ones, are contemplatingit.

Infrastructure
40. For decades, fiscal crises and poor managementhave led to under-fundingof new
investments and maintenance,leading to a deteriorationof Argentina's infrastructure.
According to the 1994 WDR,Argentina was one of the lowest performers among uppermiddle income countries and, based on 1990data, Argentina had the lowest share of
14

population with accessto safe water and the lowest share of paved roads in good
condition. With economic stabilityand changes in institutionalresponsibilitiesthrough
privatizationand decentralization,this picture has started to change.
41. To date, Argentina has gone furtherthan almost any developingcountry in privatizing
infrastructure.With Bank Group assistance,ten sub-sectorswere restructured and
privatized during 1990-95,raising US$2.1 billion in cash and debt swaps worth US$9.5
billion. Privatizationincluded future obligationsto make investments,estimated at
US$12.4 billion. The results areuncontestable,bringing clean water and sanitation
services to three million previouslyunserved residentsof Buenos Aires, providing
telephone service for 2.7 million new subscribers,improving service for 1.7 million
existing telephoneusers, rehabilitatingfour thousand km. of freight rail line, and
providing more efficient handlingfor 44 milliontons of importsand exports (about 50
percent of Argentina's total merchandisetrade) through the port of Buenos Aires.
Electricity prices, at the wholesalelevel and for large consumers,are now very
competitive. Privatizedcompanieshave been able to turn performance from loss making
(4 percent of GDP in the 1980s) to profit making.
42. Even with the boost given by the privatized companies,annual infrastructure
investmentin the last 10 years has fallen below 2 percent of GDP and there are a number
of institutional regulatory, equity and other concernsyet to completely addressed (see Box
6). Infrastructure is deficient in water and sanitation,roads, inland waterways, and urban
services (waste disposal, street paving and urban drainage). Although infrastructure
services-notably electricity, communications,gas and water--haveimproved in major
metropolitan areas, these servicesremain in short supply and inefficient in the rest of the
country. In highways and ports, demand has outstrippedsupply, and some vital intermodal linkages are missing; the use of railways for freight is low relative to road
transport, though rail is twice as cheap; and Argentina's potential for using waterways
remains untapped. Dry ports, brokering markets, and third party delivery are areas which
would significantly increase competitiveness. Privatizationat the federal level is nearly
completed so now the focus is at the provincial level. The challenge of developing
transparent, workable regulatory practices remains, particularly at the sub-national level.

15

ANDISSUES
INSTITUTIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE
Box 6: POSTPRIVATIZATION

Provision and managementof infrastructurein Argentinacan be divided intothree areas, each of which faces a range of
remaining problems and need for improvement:
Private utilities and transportservices (with state regulation}-power, gas, telecommunications,airlines,bus
*
services,port tenninals. Areasto be addressedinclude costs in some sectors; consumerprotection;regulatory
failure/capture;user safety;competitionin some sectors; and lackof serviceto poor and remote areas .
*
Concessionedand cooperativeservices with a mix of private-publicfinance-water and sanitation,railways (intercity, freight,suburban), subway,ports, airports,toll roads, solid waste disposal. Concerns include costs particularly ports and urban rail; coveragein rural and poor urban communities;levels of investment;safety and
environmentalprotection;urban pollution;consumerprotection;transparency;risk allocation;and regulations.
Publicly financedmanaged services---flood controland urban drainage; public roads (without tolls); power
*
distribution in some areas; irrigation,water distributionand rural drainage; passengerrailways, solid and hazardous
waste management. Issues are: quality and reliabilityof service;inadequateinvestments;maintenance;safety and
environmentalrecord; consumerprotection;managementand over-staffing.

43. Infrastructureand the Poor. Access to water (81%) and sewage systems (38%) in
urban areas remains deficient overall, and is even worse in rural areas (17% and 3%,
respectively). Amongpoor households,51 percent suffer from overcrowding,34 percent
lack running water, and 28 percent are locatedin areasof high risk of flooding. Although
privatization has improvedthe quality and access of service,there are concernsabout
affordability especiallyrelatingto access. In addition, data on public investmentat the
city level show that there is variationin terms of street, sidewalks,and drainage with
richer areas receivingmore than poorer areas. As such, local investmentdecisions, which
are primarily made at the municipallevel and have not received much attention in the
dialogue on poverty, is an importantarea to pursue.
44. Argentina has yet to find a solutionto its housing needs that combinesthe best of the
public sector with private resources and personalinitiative. The mainstay of the present
public housing programis FONAVI with funding of about $900 millionper year. The
fact remains that it is not designedto assist the poor: the minimum income requiredto
purchase a house is typically above the income level of a poor family. Completioncosts
are also well abovewhat other programs can do with vouchers and self-help. With an
overwhelming focus on construction,the programdoes little to upgradeexisting
neighborhoods,or to provide urban services.
Environmental Concerns

45. Argentina's ratificationof the Biodiversityand Climate ChangeConventionsreflects
its citizens' concern for the globalenvironmentalissues of bio-diversity, conservationand
global warming. Effectivepolicies to meet the obligations of these global agreements
require a broader dialogue within the Governmentand consultationwith civil society. In
particular, environmentalpolicies are shared among a wide range of institutionsat the
federal, provincial and municipal levels; there are overlappingresponsibilities,a lack of
coordination,and little institutional capacity. This complexity,as well as the lack of clear
priorities for action, has hampered finding solutionsto environmentalproblems.

16

46. Although Argentinadoes not suffer from the acute pollution problems found in many
other developingcountries, managementof water resources has emerged as the top
priority, most criticallyin urban areas but increasinglyin rural areas. Contaminationby
industrial and sewage dischargesis most severe in Greater Buenos Aires, several
provincial cities, and isolated industrial locations. As noted above, sanitation is an area in
which Argentina is well behind and a recent review by the Bank indicatesthat serious
problems of water quality are emerging becauseof aquifermining and vertical
contaminationof water tables that could have catastrophicconsequencesin 15to 25 years.
Declining fertility, soil loss due to water and wind erosion, and salinization;along with
water logging, currently affect one third of the irrigatedarea and will pose greater threats
to agriculturein coming years. Paradoxically,water consumptionat 500 liters per day per
person is extremelyhigh. Sustainablefisheriesmanagementhas been identifiedas a
particular area of concern,along with coastal and maritime management. Argentina's
fishing industry, which representedas much as $ 1 billion in exports only a few years ago,
is on the point of collapse, the consequencesof several years of over-fishing.
47. Increased investmentin sustainablenatural resourcedevelopmentrequires a clear
regulatory frameworkand public sector oversight. The Governmentestimatesthat
Argentina spends publicly some 2 percent of GDP in pollution, abatement, control and
environmentwhich comparesfavorablyto OECD countries. The bulk of this spending is
by municipalitiesfor solid waste collection and disposal. Yet, solid waste disposal
problems are far from being resolved as open dumpingis commonand the public sector is
likely under-spendingin terms of monitoring,enforcement,awareness and education.
Gender
48. Argentina shares some characteristicsof OECD countries when it comes to gender -equality in educational opportunityin particular-but it is also a country of contrastsand
there exist important gender based differences, as identified in the recent review by the
Bank. In the area of education,there are little differences,with female students suffering
less from repetition than males, but losing ground at secondaryschool in terms of
educational outcomes. In the labor market, there has been a significantincrease in female
participation, notably during economic crises, but with a steady upward trend as female
education levels rise. Poor women, however,tend to work less than their richer
counterparts, and tend to be concentrated in the service sector. Yet, the largest difference
in wages exists among professionalswith females earning 65 percent of the wages paid to
men. The drop in wages paid to lower skilled males, in fact, is seen as a growing social
problem as is the rising unemploymentrate among male youths with few skills. Some of
the most striking differences are in the area of health, especiallyreproductive services:
despite popular acceptance, there is no nationalpolicy on reproductivehealth and illegal
abortions are thought to be one of the major causes of Argentina's relatively high maternal
mortality rate. Adolescents, low income groups and rural populations all have limited
access to family planning services. The result is large dependencyrates in poor families,
with almost half of Argentina's children below the poverty line, and increasing adolescent
pregnancies among the poorly educated.

17

49. This situation has seriousconsequencesas family structure,gender roles and
education levels are strongly inter-linkedand combineto perpetuatepoverty. While being
a single female head of household does not necessarilymean being poor as compared to a
male head of household, there is a greater chance that the children of such a family will be
poor and a higher chance of not being in school: 67 percent as compared to 51 percent.
As a consequenceof their family responsibilities,mothersmay seek work which is more
flexible, albeitwith lower pay, and less opportunityfor advancement. Poor women, too,
take on a larger role in communityactivities,volunteeringat communalkitchens and child
developmentcenters. Importantly,poor single femaleheaded families are more likely to
receive public assistancethan singleparent familiesheaded by males. Children in these
latter families, thus, are most likely to be left unattendedby social programs.
ConsolidatingMacro-EconomicReforms
50. Argentina's macroeconomicstability dependson both foreignand domestic
confidencein the currencyboard introducedin 1991 as the key feature of the
Convertibilityplan which stabilizedthe economy. Despitepast shocks, this plan remains
sound and enjoys the full support of the new administrationand society. The initial
conditions in Argentinaamplyjustified the adoptionof the currency board and, giventhe
high degree of dollarization,it is widely understoodthat the abandonmentof the plan
under crisis conditions would lead to wide-spreaddefault. Currently,62 percent of private
credit and 59 percent of private deposits are held in foreigncurrency, and 95 percent of
public debt .4 Unlike the 1995crisis which saw significantcapital flight, international
reserves and bank deposits continued to grow during 1999,with dollar deposits increasing
from 55 to 59 percent. As a result, not only was the Convertibilitylaw observed at all
times in 1999, but the monetary base wasfully covered by intemationalreserves.
51. Taking the ConvertibilityPlan as an anchorof the economy implies an automatic
adjustment to capital flow shocks, be they internal or external in nature, which may result
in demonetization,causing an economiccontraction. In reality, the political willingnessto
tolerate any economic contractionis related to the willingnessto absorb the social costs
primarily in terms of unemployment. Social protectionand counter-cyclicspending
especially for these programs, thus, becomes a necessary complementto the Convertibility
Plan. At the same time, given limited capacity of lender of last resort to the financial
system, the monetary authoritieshave to have an arrayof liquidity facilities. Sincethe
required adjustmentis determinedby the economy's ability to absorb shocks, flexible
factor markets, including labor, are essential.
52. With this as background,it is clear that the current focus of macro-economicpolicy in
Argentina is appropriatelyplaced in reducing the fiscal deficit and liberalizinglabor
markets while providing social safety nets and keepingthe banking system solid.
Progress has been very good in the latter but there is still much to do on the other fronts.
figuresdiffer considerablyfromthose of countriessuch as Brazil,Mexicoand Chile,which havemuch
higher relativesharesof domesticdebt. Uruguay,on the other hand,has debt characteristicsand levelsof
dollarizationmore like Argentina's.
4These

18

Importantly,Argentina needs to reduce its vulnerabilityto shocks,mainly by bringing
down country risk perceptions which means reducing the accumulationof public debt at
both the federal and provinciallevels and by expanding exports. To achieve the former,
Argentina needs to continue its presentpath of fiscal disciplineand to deepen structural
measures to promote domestic savings and financial intermediation. An important feature
of the fiscal program is to have a "rainy day" fund, as now required under the law of fiscal
responsibility. The Governmentneeds to monitor carefully key economicindicators such
as debt to GDP and debt service that have deteriorated in the 1990s.
53. The main instrumentfor Argentina to remain competitiveand expand its exports is
improvingproductivity. Over the period 1991-98,total factor productivity (TFP) grew at
2.1 percent annually, reducing productioncosts. These gains first came from the use of
installed capacity from 1991 to 1993,followedby the effects of gross domestic
investment which grew from 16.8percent of GDP in 1992 to 19.9percent in 1998 (before
slipping in 1999),use of technology and, most importantly,the fruits of privatization,
deregulationand opening up of the economy. Aggregatecosts for selected manufacturing
sectors have increased only slightly,at 0.8 percent annually since 1993. Labor costs and
capital costs have decreased at 3.5 percent per year, compensatingfor price increasesof
tradable and non-tradableinputs. The service sector (otherthan public utilities and
banking) lagged behind and is the only sector where unit costs are above those in 1992.
54. All of this points to the need to mount an assault on those areas constraining
productivity growth and flexibility in the economy. The main areas include:
*

the reduction of labor costs (wages and payroll taxes) in the formal sector and
increased flexibility via reform of labor regulations (see Box 7);

*

increased access by theprivate sector tofinancing, particularly middle marketfirms
and SMEs, through capital market developmentand reductionsin the cost of capital;

*

improvement in workers' skills and education, the inadequacyof which became
apparent in the course or economicrestructuringunder the Convertibility Plan;

*

reduction of transactioncosts, due to the incompletetransformationof the tax system,
the judicial system, customs, etc., both at the federal and sub-nationallevels;

*

renewed vigor in trade reform with less use of antidumpingmeasures and tariff
dispersion, as well as reduction in customs delays; and

*

reduction of excessively high logistic and inventory costs, which are nearly three
times higher than OECD countries and over 30 percent of GDP.

19

Box 7: Labor Market Reform and Poverty
Current labor legislation tends to be biased against the absorption of labor. Centralized or sectoral collective
bargaining agreements limit finns' abilities to adapt to competitive conditions. The ergo omnes clause extends these
agreements to all workers and finns in the sector. even if not signed. Ninety percent of present contracts are "Ultraactive", remaining in force even after expiration, and lock in work arrangementsthat may no longer be appropriate to
market conditions. High non-wage benefits drive labor costs up relative to the cost of capital. Restrictionson firing
discourage firms from hiring additionalworkers.
Recent experience with reforms in the 1990s supports the view that these contracts are binding. Past reforms lowered
payroll taxes somewhat, improved the pension system, and provided for temporary contracts that were exempt from
payroll tax and severance payments. Employment under these modalidadespromovidas reached nearly 5% of total
employed workers by 1998, and accounted for 40% of the new jobs created between 1996-98. However, the
modalidadespromovidas were abolished in 1998 which may have further added to unemploymentin 1999. The labor
law changes in 1998also shortenedprobationperiods, and further centralizedcollectivebargaining arrangements.
Reversing these regulationsis critical. Overall,the existing labor legislationis ill-suitedto a new competitive
environment,makes adjustmentsto adverse shocks difficult and discouragesfirms from taking on additionalworkers.
Programs such as PYMES(1994) which gives firmsof less than fifty employeesa special regime for collective
bargaining and facilitatinglabor contracting are importantfor giving firms the flexibility to adapt and grow.

Private Sector Development
55. The changesin Argentina's economy policies and the concomitant shift in the role of
the state places the private sectorin center stage for increasedproductionand employment
generation. The private sector also has a major role to play in infrastructureand public
services as a result of previous privatization. (For more details see the Private Sector
Strategy in Annex A.) Yet, several challengesremain:
* Improving access of the private sector (particularlymiddle market firms and SMEs)
to long term financingfor modemizationand expansion,and enabling firms to ride
through major disruptions of extemal capital markets.
* Helping increase the role that the private sector can play in sectors previously in the
public domain (eg social sectors, housing).
* Improving the businessenvironment,particularly skills development,labor markets,
and the judicial system.
56. Blue-chip Argentine firms have improvedtheir productivityover the past ten years
and have shown resilienceduring the two recessions. Economicliberalizationand
improved efficiency stemmingfrom privatizationof infrastructure(e.g. reductions in
transportationcosts) have helped these companies maintain competitivenessand maintain
access to long-termfinancing. They also have professionalmanagement and welleducated workforces. The rest of the corporate sector lacks accessto long-term finance,
either domestic or foreign. Having come through the effects of the Tequilacrisis, many of
these middle-marketand smaller firms (SMEs) have becomemore efficient, and their low
leveragehelps them weather crises. However,they lack access to capital for further
improvingtheir productivityas financingcosts are prohibitive. Regional development
remains uneven. Finally, the private sector has potentialin the provision of social
services,particularly in private health care and tertiary and vocationaleducation.

20

57. As noted above, large firms and some smaller ones show relatively good corporate
govemance, although family holdings still dominateand many smaller firms need
improvementsin governanceand management. Firms in less developedprovinces tend to
lag further behind in both governanceand management. Broadeningcorporate ownership
is important,and the recent growth in the private equity industry is encouraging.
However, the Argentinepublic equity market still lacks depth. Much needs to be done in
disclosure and disseminationof financial information.
58. Argentina's banking sectorhas one of the strongest in Latin America, with a good
regulatory and supervisoryframework,althoughthere remain too many smaller, weaker
banks. Moreover,the system intermediatesto the private sector only a small fraction of
savings compared with many other developingcountries(see para. 13 of the PSS). Most
private banks have only intermittentaccessto long-term funding in the external market,
and tend not lend long-term (except essentiallyfor IFC and IDB credit lines). The
Government'srequirementscan crowd out the private sector when credit is scarce.
59. The non-bankingfinancial sector,typically serving smaller companies with leasing
and factoring, is in an early stage of development(paras. 18-21of the PSS). There has
been growth in pension and mutual funds since the mid-l 990's. The creation of private
pension funds in 1994 was a major move to increase domestic savingsand long-term
capital. These funds now stand at about $15 billion. In general, capital markets lack
depth; much needs to be done to develop the corporate bond market, leasing, equities, and
housing finance where IFC is presentlysupporting the secondarymortgage market.
Equity market capitalizationis relatively low at around 18 percent of GDP, with a few
large companies, mainly the privatizedutilities, comprisingthe majority.
Institutional Capacity and Governance
60. While Argentina has favorable ratings on overall institutional development,especially
in economic management,it is weaker as regards policies for social inclusion/equityand
public sector management. Institutionalweaknessesare pervasive at both provincial and
local levels, and exist among core agencies such as tax administrationand the judiciary.
Although liberalization and privatizationhave greatly reduced opportunitiesfor public
sector corruption in absolute terms, the general perception is that it remains widespread.
Argentina has a legacy of tax evasion, lack of internalcontrols and cultural norms that
inhibit whistle-blowingand the serious pursuit of allegations,as highlighted in a recent
Bank review. Thus, there are major gains to be made in encouragingtransparency and
disclosureof public accounts and contracting. There are also gains to be made in
modernizingpublic expendituresystems and internal control and auditing, especially at
the provincial level. A recent review by the Bank on 'the federal financial management
system showed it to be adequate,albeit with the potential for improvement.
61. This situation is exacerbated by a judiciary seen as politicized and demonstrably
inefficient. A diagnosis carried out by the Bank, building on a previous IDF grant, shows
that the system suffers from heavy case loads, inequitabledistribution of resources, poor
infrastructure,little in the way of modernmanagementprocesses, and overly centralized

21

administration. These weaknessesall contributeto long delays and seemingly lack of
responsiveness. Judicial inefficiency,as well as poor law enforcementand economic
marginalization,are seen as contributingto higher incidenceof violent crime and
increased perceptionsof insecurity. The lack of a reliable and efficientjudicial system,
moreover,tends to increase the costs of commercialtransactionsand hamper the
developmentof market mechanismbased on contractualobligations.
ProvincialReform
62. Argentina'spublic sectoris highly decentralized. The 24 provincial governments,
including the autonomousCity of BuenosAires, are responsiblefor almost half of public
sector expenditures,including 90 percent of public spending in health and education.
Decentralizationof health and educationduring the 1990shas increasinglyforged a direct
link between sub-nationalgovernmentsand the human and infrastructuredevelopment:
much of the critical servicesare now more clearlywith the provinces. A companion to
improved service delivery is fiscal balance. At present,the incentivesfor the provincesto
be fiscally responsibleare not adequate. With about 56 percent of provincialrevenues
provided by automatic transfersfrom federal-provincialrevenue sharing (and up to 90
percent range for many smaller provinces),there are few externalincentivesto improve
fiscal performance,with a weak link between local demandsfor public goods and services
and local taxation. Reform of the federal-provincialrevenue sharing system is thus a top
priority (see Box 8). Moreover,there remainsconsiderablepotential for duplicationand
lack of clarity in responsibilitybetweenthe federal and provincial levels.
Box 8: Reform of Revenue Sharing
A long-standing issue facing the Federal Govemment and the Provinceshas been the system of revenue sharing
between the two levels of govemment and among the provinces(the systemof co-participation). A new proposal,
prepared with Bank assistanceand being promoted under the SSAL, is presently being debated with the goal of finding
a better balance between: (i) the collection of taxes and responsibilityfor spending;(ii) the incentivesfor spending and
social equity for the poorer provinces; (iii) the predictabilityof revenues and the need for fiscal adjustment; (iv) the
level of revenues collected and the incentivesfor economicefficiency; and (v) the transparencyin the allocation
process and the need to provide emergency support. A new agreementwhich is more equitable and efficient, would
help provide greater incentives for provinces to collecttheir own revenuesand to reduce their demandson the Federal
Govemment for bailouts. Finding such a balance,while ensuringthe 100 percent acceptance by all the parties needed to
put the new system into place by law, has been hard (in contrast,the ConvertibilityLaw, which radically changedthe
economic landscape in Argentina,only required a two-thirdsmajority vote). The political difficultiesof reaching a
new agreement cannot be overstated,particularly with current fiscal problems that give the FederalGovernment little
with which to bargain. On the other hand, as an increasingnumber of provincessee the wisdom of bringing their own
house in fiscal order, with the support of the Federal Govemment,the Bank and the IDB,the number of constituentsfor
a system that rewards greater efficiencyhas grown during the past decade.

63. Social Indicators. Like the provincialpoverty statistics cited earlier, social
indicators vary by provinces. The poorer parts of the country,particularly the North, face
a very different health profile from the richer central area and Buenos Aires: for example,
Formosa's infant mortalityrate of 30 per 1000 is 50 percent greater than the national
average. On the other hand, some provinceshave infant mortality rates of 12 per 1000
and some have been made great strides in reducing their rate-Salta, for example.
22

Regional difference in educationare less stark, with most parts of the country performing
poorly in retention rates but the quality of educationis particularly deficient in the North.
The poorer provinces,such as Chaco,Argentina's second poorest province, tend to have
lower shares of their population with completedsecondaryeducation while the wealthier
centralprovinces show higher than average rates of completed secondaryeducation. The
Provinceof Buenos Aires has relatively poor indicators on education,health and
unemployment,given its income level close to the nationalaverage.
64. Fiscal and EconomicReforms. The situation in the 24 provinces is disparate. The
1999recession brought the provinces' aggregatedeficitto some $ 3.7 billion (about 1.2
percent of GDP) as compared to $ 1.4 billion in 1997,not countingincome from
privatization. Much of this deteriorationis attributableto the Province of Buenos Aires
which doubled its deficit. But the difficultiesin the past year obscure the substantial
reforms over the past ten years and much greater discipline in federal-provincialrelations.
All provinces have started on improvingfinancial management,some are embarked on
improvementsto the judiciary, and all are involvedin implementingreforms in health and
education with Bank and IDB assistance. The largest provinces,such as Santa Fe,
Mendoza,Cordoba and the Provinceof Buenos Aires, have had particular difficulties in
cyclical downturns, as evidencedin 1999,and need to upgrade the quality and coverage of
their public services as they are home to the largest concentrationof the urban poor.
Some other provinceshave sound fiscal situations,small populations, low levels of
poverty, and high revenuesfrom natural resources. At the other end of the spectrum,there
are a number of provinces, typically amongthe poorest, with high social demands,poor
institutional capacities, weak fiscal performance and high debt.
65. Debt Problems. Chronic deficits and dangerouslevels of indebtednessin some
provinces have generatedsocial and political unrest and contributedto the overall fiscal
problem. In most cases, the problem is not the total amount of debt relative to GDP per se
but weak fiscal efforts by these provinces and the short term nature of their debts. Debt
service and amortizationcan amount to up to 25 to 30 percent of revenues in the worst
cases. Another part of the problem is the lack of incentives by the banks and capital
markets to restrain financing as provincial debt can be guaranteedby the province from its
share of federal revenues (since these revenuesare collected by the federal government,
and repayment is made automatically from the respective provincialaccounts there is little
risk of default). Achieving a sustainable fiscal position may require a combination of debt
restructuring and fiscal measures; in other cases, fiscal measures alone may be sufficient.
The approach should be case-by-caseand well grounded on changing future incentives.
66. Municipal-ProvincialRelations. The process of reform in Argentina has been
cascading and has yet to reach the municipalities. Emerging issues of municipal debt,
fiscal management and revenue sharing with the provinces constitutea major challenge in
provincial-municipalrelations. Although municipalgovernmentsin the aggregateaccount
for less than 10 percent of public expenditures,the failure of most to engage in meaningful
reform undermines efforts by provincesand provides a weak basis for confrontinggrowing
urban problems, especiallythose facing the poor.

23

C. GOVERNMENTDEVELOPMENTSTRATEGY
67. The Administrationof Presidentde la Rua, which took office in December 1999, is
firmly committedto improvingfiscal and social performancewithin the frameworkof the
ConvertibilityPlan. Its long-termvision for Argentinafocuseson education,excellence
in research and investigation,equity,productivity,competition,innovation,protectionof
the environment,and fiscal responsibility. It sees the state becoming more agile, capable,
and transparent. Its goal is to morethan doubleexports and to achieve growth averaging
at least 5 percent per year, bringingArgentinato the level of Israel among more developed
countries by 2010. Moreover,it hopes to overcomeregional disparitieswith each region
of Argentinabeing considered"high income". Commensurately,the goal is for
Argentina's social indicatorsto be in line with those of OECD countries, especially in
terms of infant mortality(7 deathsper 1000 live births), access to safe water (100
percent), and unemployment(about 8 percent).
The First Steps
68. This is an ambitiousagenda and the first steps have focused on the fiscal front. Faced
with a prolongedrecession,high unemploymentand high levels of poverty, plus a fiscal
deficit of more than 2 percent in 1999,the new administrationhas moved quickly to cut
expenditures,raise taxes, and negotiatea new IMF program. It reached an agreementwith
the provinces on stabilizingprovincialtransfers for the next two years. All of these
measures served to restore confidenceand resulted in a sharp reduction in countryrisk as
compared to mid-1999. It has been quickto reaffirm the importanceof MERCOSUR.
Importantly,the Governmenthas proposed a major piece of legislationon labor reform.
Medium-termAgenda
69. An Intense Fiscal Effort. These early measures form part of a medium term
strategy focused on deepening the reform of the state and making Argentinamore
competitive. At the federal level, there is still a major adjustmentrequiredto comply with
the law of fiscal responsibilitywhich means furtherreducing expenditures,increasing
efficiency and equity in expenditures,and reducing waste and corruption. The goal is a
positive fiscal position by 2003. The Governmentfurther recognizesthat its economic
program depends on aggregatefiscal performance;it establishedfiscal targets including
the provinces and has launched a programto assist the poorest and most heavily indebted
provinces to restructuretheir debt in turn for improvedperformance. This program will
be monitored closely, and if the provincesfail to achievetheir targets, they will lose the
debt relief. All provinceswill be expectedto contributeto the fiscal effort and abide by
basic parametersof the law of fiscal responsibility. At the same time, the Governmentis
continuing the dialogue on a new system for federal-provincialrevenue sharing.
70. Promoting Investment and Growth. Enhancing fiscalperformance is seen as key
in reducing the countryrisk perceptions,thereby reducing the high interest rates
hampering economicrecovery and growth. Accessto credit is seen to have been an
important limitationfor small and medium size firms (SMEs). The role of such firms is

24

seen as crucial in increasingemployment,reducingpoverty and narrowing regional
inequities. Severalnew programs are being developed with the expectationthat these
will, among other things, help to promote exports. The Government's agenda also
includes a new focus on information,technology, researchand investigationwhich have
been neglected and are seen as having considerablegrowth potential in Argentina.
71. Reducing the bottlenecksin infrastructureis another key to improvingArgentina's
competitiveness. The Governmenthas movedto refocus on the economy's neglected
needs in infrastructure,creating a new Ministry of Infrastructureand Housing. An active
dialogue has begun with the provincesto coordinatepublic infrastructureneeds and to
provide the forum for a comprehensivestrategy. It is proceeding under the SSAL to set up
the structureto coordinateand promotemulti-modaltransport,one of the weakest areas.
Simultaneously,the Governmenthas engaged the privatized companies in an effort to
reduce selected tariffs and to refocus investmentcommitments. Improvingregulatory
perfornance, as being promoted under the SSAL, is critical. Expandingprivate sector
investmentin infrastructureis also seen as a key for enhancingcompetitivenessby
reducing logistic costs and improvingthe access of the poor to services. Overall, this
effort would focus on improvingaccess to externalmarkets, particularlyfor the regional
economies of the interior, addressingcongestion,and loweringtransport costs.
72. On the external side, the Governmentis firmly committedto making MERCOSUR
work and joining in other regional and global efforts to harmonizetrade regimes and
reduce barriers. In that context, hemispherictrade issues are on the agenda, and Argentina
remains an active and committed partner of the Cairns group. Relations with Brazil are
critical. On the long run, it means integratingeconomicmanagementand making
MERCOSUR an effective tool to enhance growth and to be competitivein global markets.
73. Labor Market Flexibility and Employment. As well recognized,Argentina's
ability to compete and to adjust to shocks depends on the flexibility of its factor markets.
A significant challenge remainsin the market for labor: defacto this market has become
more flexibleby increasing informalitywhich has very serious consequencesin terms of
social risks, especially for uninsured workers,and tax evasion. To reduce the incentives
to informality, help reduce unemploymentand make labor more competitive,the
Government has proposed a new set of labor reforms which would decentralizebargaining
and increase probation periods for new workers. It has also indicated its intention to
continue to reduce the non-wage costs of labor in the context of sound fiscal management.
In addition, it intends to reorientjob training and employmentsupport programs to make
them more effective and efficient.
74. Governance. To address concerns for public corruption which plagued the previous
regime, the Government will modernizethe state and bring greater transparency. It has
already begun pursuing several cases of public corruption and is strengtheningthe
monitoring of public ethics. A new Office of Anti-Corruptionhas been created and the
Government expects to make improvementsin public procurement,as well as availability
of information. On the revenue side, it also intends to attack private sector corruption in
the form of tax evasion.

25

75. SocialJustice and Equity. While understandingthat fiscalconstraints limit the
room for increased spending,the Governmenthas a strong commitmentto greater social
equity, in partnership with the provinces. Social sector sp~endingwould be increasingly
focused on the poor, particularlyin education,where an importantpart of the budget
would be reorientedtoward schoolsserving poorer students. The Governmenthopes to
increase total spending in education,bringing it to the level of 6 percent of GDP. As part
of this new policies,the Governmenthas createdan instituteto mobilize private sector
contributionsto finance projects aimed at poor schools. It has created another instituteto
evaluate educationalattainment,and is committedto including Argentinain international
standardizededucationaltest. It would continue to finance compensatoryprograms, such
as school scholarships,and to expand supportfor distance learning and computers. On
higher education,the focus is on increasedquality among public universities and the
search for ways to make the systemmore equitableand diversified. At the other end of
the spectrum, the intentionis to expand pre-schoolfor children above three years of age.
76. In the health sector, a comprehensivenational strategy is emerging from the various
reforms and pilot programs initiated over the past five years. The Government's priorities
are the design and implementationof an integratednational health care system which is
universal and equitableat the sametime as improvingefficiencyand quality. Public
health spending would increasinglyfocus on primarycare and prevention. Continuation
of the process of consolidationof health insuranceand the restructuring of these funds,
including that for the retired, is also part of this strategy.
77. Recognizingthe need to strengthenthe social safety net, reduce social risks, and spur
community development,it is the Government's intentionto revamp many social
programns,in collaborationwith the provinces. Particularattention would be paid to: (i)
reducing duplication and administrativecosts; (ii) increasingtargeting where needed and
coverage, especially for the indigent and children as priority groups; and (iii) putting in
place a registry of beneficiarieswhich can both help to target programs and to reduce
fraud. The Government is examiningalternativeways of providing support linked to
participant in particular social programs. Attention would be increasinglypaid to selected
vulnerable groups, including children and poor women who lack access to reproductive
health services, indigenouspeoples who lack basic servicesand have little income
generating opportunity,and the poor old aged who do not have public pensions. The
needs of the rural poor, ignored in most social programs, are on the agenda. It has also
launched an initiative to reform the public pension system. This would be a very
important contributionto both fiscal balance and equity.
78. Sustainable Development. On environment,the overarchingstrategy is one of
conservation of Argentina's rich bio-diversity and sustainabledevelopmentof its natural
resources. The Government's stanceon environmentis multi-faceted,with a coordinating
unit in the Office of the Chiefof Cabinet. It remains committedto the goals of the Kyoto
Protocol and is keen to participatein new global initiatives such as the carbon fund. In
terms of immediateproblems,it has taken action to curb excessivefishing of the depleted
hake stock and is preparing measuresfor more sustainabledevelopment. On Yacyreta, the

26

Governmenthas indicated its intentionto see the project through to its final design level
of 83 meters, albeit at a gradual pace, and is proceeding to reach agreementswith its
Paraguayanpartners while maintaining an open dialogue with the Bank and IDB.
D. BANKGROUP COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY
Progressand Portfolio Performance
79. Over the past ten years, Argentina has become a major borrower, with the Bank
Group actively supportingthe economicreforms under the ConvertibilityPlan. Bank
lending in the early 1990swas concentratedon economicand federal public sector
reforms, with IFC complementingthose efforts with investmentsin the liberalizedsectors.
Sectorbased investmentoperations followed,but the use of adjustmentoperations
continued, associated with emergencysituationsand support for provincialreforms. In
the aggregate,financing by both the Bank and IFC has increasedwhen Argentina's access
to private capital markets has been limited, in conjunctionwith the IMF and IDB.
80. Outcomes and Status of the Portfolio. The Bank's program has been successful, as
reflected in OED's Country Evaluation Update(see Box 13): of the 20 projects initiated
and completed since 1991, only one has been rated as unsatisfactory-the Capital Market
Developmentproject. Performance of the current portfolio also remains good: there have
been major improvementsin implementationsince the early 1990sbut dips in
performance occurred during the Tequila crisis, and most recently with the Russia/Brazil
crises. At present, the Bank's portfolio is concentratedin infrastructure(44% by value not
including SSAL), along with social sectors and sub-nationalgovernments. Excluding the
SSAL, more than 50 percent of the portfolio is with sub-national governments. Thirteen
percent of the portfolio currently has problems,reflecting recent deterioration because of
delays, counterpartfinancing problemsand debt limitations. In addition, Yacyreta
remains a problem project, with intensive supervisionunderway.5
0
81. Collaboration in managing the portfolio is generallyvery good. We have, for
example, been successful in incorporatinggender as a generic feature (see Box 9). On the
other hand, efforts to reduce chronic delays in audits and in administrativeprocesses have
been less effective; we intend to renew our efforts on these fronts with the new
government and the active participationof the local FinancialManagement Specialist.
The portfolio was reviewed before the change in government and another review will take
place in mid-2000. The most serious constraint facing implementationat present is the
lack of counterpartfunds and the ceiling on public debt, issues which cannot be resolved
until the 2001 budget when we expect that we may have to reduce programs through
partial cancellations. Some $ 900 million of infrastructureinvestmentloans are being
held up for lack of budget authority. The Bank continuesto carry out selective
procurement audits, facilitated by the local ProcurementSpecialist,and we are working

s The latest progress report to the Board on Yacyretawas discussed at an informal seminar on January 28,
2000.

27

with the new administrationon integratingproject accountswith the federal financial
managementsystem.
Box9: IntegratingGenderintothe Portfolio
Our approach has been to integrate gender dimensionsintothe ongoing portfolio and new operations. To lay the basis
for this, a gender review of the portfolio was undertakenin FY 99 to assess wherethere were undiscoveredopportunities
and synergiesto includegender: this sector-by-sectorperspectiveopenednew doorswith local authorities and Bank
staff who were keen to see more and better gender considerationin Bank-financedprojects. So illuminatingwas this
analysis that we publishedit as a separate book, with 3000 copies already distributedand a reprint on order. A local
Gender NGO Consultative Groupwas fonned, consistingof 22 projectmanagers,govemment officials,NGOs and other
donors. In addition, a JapanesePHRD grant was approvedto supportproject-levelactions, such as trainingfor
governmentstaff, workshops on what worksin projects and what needs to be improved,and generally to lend a helping
hand to project and Bank staff who want to equip themselvesto handlegender concems. Severalstaff have also taken
up the offer of support include gender analysisin new operations- e.g. the proposed CatamarcaProvincialReform
operation-and ongoing operations-e.g. the MunicipalDevelopmentII project. Our gender work has generated
enthusiasm to do more: one of the by-productsis the preparationof a LIL to supporta Family CapacityBuilding project
for possible Bank financingin FY01.

Client Survey and Feedback
82. In order to obtain feedback on our performanceand the Bank's program,a survey
was undertaken in June-July 1999and some 70 responseswere received, about the same
response as the first survey as part of the Bank's pilot program in 1997. While the
questions are not strictly comparable,the general conclusionsare similar: the Bank is
seen as a reliable partner, especiallyin terms of deliveringon commitmentsand
disbursements. However,there is a significantgap between our perceivedeffectiveness in
reducing poverty-low-and the importanceof doing that-high. We are seen as being
somewhatmore effective in deliveringon economicgrowth. Respondentsplaced the
greatest importanceon realism, given Argentina's situation and constraints,and also rated
the Bank as most effective in that area, even if there is room for improvement.
83. Interviewssupplementedthe questionnaire. Responsesrevealeda generallypositive
image for the Bank and an appreciationof the significantcontributionsbeing made,
ranging from provincialreforms to infrastructureand improvementin animal health. Our
presence in the area of poverty was cited as being strong. Respondentsalso noted the
need to differentiatemore on a regional basis. Differencesshowed up on the role of civil
society and the Bank's effort to promoteparticipation. Therewere also differences on our
role with respect to support for the private sector versus the public sector, and few saw
results from our efforts to improvepublic sector institutionalcapacity. Availability of
information was a concern, as was excessivebureaucratizationof project implementation
and use of consultants. As part of the feedback process, we also conducted an extensive
process of public consultationsthat helped us to appreciatethe concerns of civil society
and their expectationsof the Bank Group (see Box 10).

28

Box 10: The ConsultativeProcess
In September 1999, we met with our ArgentinaNGO working group, which consists of about 30 NGOs-mainly
networks-to explain the CAS and to agree on a consultativeprocess. It was decided that there would be meetings in
the four main geographicregions (North East,North West,Central, plus Patagonia/South)as well as in the capital,
Buenos Aires, capped by a nationalconsultation. In anticipationof the meetings,we prepared a brief summary of all of
the4projectssupported by the Bank and a series of 26 policy notes, ranging from poverty and voicesto the poor, to
climate change and banking. These notes were based on the Bank's on-going and recently completed economicand
sector work, operationalexperienceand the poverty assessment. The 26 notes were not meant to be comprehensivenor
exhaustive but, in a conciseand simple way, to synthesize the Bank's work and experiencein Argentina. They can be
found on the Bank's web page-www.worldbank.org-then selecting regions (LAC), choosingArgentina, and going
to CASlink. The documentswere providedto all the new authoritiesat the federal and provincial levels and other key
parties, and shared with the organizers and participantsat the meetings.
Invitations were sent to unions,joumalists, academics,local authorities,politicians,NGOs, communityorganizations
and churches. In each province,there was a meeting to preparefor the regional consultations. At the regional and
national meetings,the discussionswere organized in separate 10 workshopswith plenary session at the end. The
format was for the groups to review and discussthe documents in workshopsand then to share their reactions and
recommendationswith us in the plenary session. In total, about 4500 persons participated,with about 2000 attending
the regional and national meetings. For many,this was the first chance ever to have informationon the Bank's
activities in Argentina. The national consultationwas inaugurated by the Vice President of the Nation.
IFC participated in most of the regional meetings as well as the nationalmeeting, and separately consulted with private
sector firms, banks, public officials, academicsand associations. These meetings helped to validate our understanding
of the main priorities for private sector development-education being at the top, along with access to capital,
institutionalimprovements,corporategovemance-as well as the main opportunities-tourism, information
technology, exports,agro-businessand adding value to other naturalresource based industries.
The inputs were many and varied. Not all agreed with the Bank. We received substantive suggestionsand
recommendations,combined with general observations on how to improvethe Bank's effectivenessin Argentina. On
the latter, there were four common reactions: the need to make projects more participatory,the need to have closer
monitoring and more transparency;the need to integrate activities on the ground; and the need to differentiate among
regions. Our commitment to the participants is that we will return to them, once the CAS has been finalized, with a
response on how and why we were able to incorporatetheir suggestionsand if not, why not. We have also agreed to
continue the consultative process as the CAS is implemented.

Sector Perspectives on Performance

84. Social Protection has been the area of considerableinnovationand achievementin
terns of poverty alleviation during the last CAS period. There have been notable results
with the Bank-financedTRABAJAR program,not only for its effective targeting and rapid
response, but the use of evaluationtechniques. Another innovativeprogram has been the
exchange of federal-provincialdata as part of the Social and Tax Registry Project
(SINTyS). This is turning out to be a very effective tool to reduce fraud and evasion. So
far, with minimum investmentin the system, savingsor new revenuesof some $ 50
million have been identified. The Social InvestmentFund (FOPAR)pioneered
participatory, community led development,and work on social and poverty analysis under
SIEMPRO (Social Protection I and IV projects) has enabled access to comprehensive
information on social programs and beneficiary incidencefor the first time. Finally, the
Integrated Drug PreventionPilot LIL aims at obtaining an accuratepicture of drug use
and strategies for drug prevention,a growing problem especially amongthe poor.

29

85. Progress in educationhas been slower than hoped, due to resistance to change, long
standing complaintsover teachersalaries, and weak institutionalcapacities. Bank
assistance has focused on secondaryeducationwith the First, Second and Third
SecondaryEducation Projects providingsupportfor programs reaching about one-third of
secondaryschool students. The Bank's supportfor curriculumdevelopment,evaluation of
the students, informationsystem, training of the educationadministrators,and
administrativereform is seen as having advancedmost in the area of studentevaluation
and new administrativerules, as well as equippingpoor schools. In order to get input
from civil society on how well these programshave been doing, we propose to use
"social" auditing, as suggested during the CAS consultations,in the evaluation of the First
SecondaryEducationproject.
86. Through AAA, the Bank initiated a policy dialogueon improvingthe quality of
teaching, examiningteachers' salariesand options for upgradingteachertraining and
careers, with appropriateincentives,but the results in terms of actions have so far been
disappointing. The Bank's Higher EducationReform Loan sought to enhancethe quality
of higher educationand alter the funding mechanismbut has been less than successful on
inducing fundamentalchange due to major opposition. A strategyto increase private
sector financingfor public universitieswas worked out with the previous administration
under the SSAL; however,there is no consensuson what concretesteps might be taken.
IFC has innovated with two investmentsin private universities,as enrollment in private
universities in still low in Argentina and the demand expandingrapidly. For its part, the
IDB is supporting reformnsat the primary level, as well as enhancingretentionefforts
through a scholarshipprogramfor poor students.
87. The Bank's program in Argentinain health is diversifiedand shows promise but is
complex in terms of implementationand there is still much more to do. The Bank was an
early partner in the Maternal-ChildHealth and Nutrition project (PROMIN)in 1993. The
reduction of infant mortality rates has been notable, in part the result of PROMIN's
success in putting this issue on the agenda,and by upgrading the capacity of primary
clinics in poor communities. The project helped to introduce monitoring child
development,targeting food supplementsand convertingday-care to early child
development centers. While there were successes(final evaluationis still pending),the
first operation has fallen short in changingnutrition policies, instilling a monitoring and
evaluation culture, and expandingreproductivehealth services. Moreover,there is still a
large population unserved, including some of the poorest. The first stage of health
insurance reform supported by the Bank was mostly successful-except for the reform of
the retirees health fund-- yet this is only the beginning. In other areas,the AIDS and STD
Control Project financesHIV/AIDS-and STD-relatedhealth promotionand disease
prevention, a new operation to support DiseaseSurveillanceand Preventionand a LIL for
Health Insurancefor the Uninsuredare at an early stage of implementation.
88. ProvincialReform. The Bank has had major involvementwith the provinces since
the early 1990sand there are considerablesigns of progress on the structural side.
Through these efforts:

30

*
*
*

*

*

13 provincialbanks and 22 other loss making major public enterprises were
privatized during the period 1995-99;
all nrovinceshave initiated programs, and some are well advanced, in improving their
ta- .ollection systems (cadasters,etc), fiscal managementand budgeting systems;
all provinceshave entered into fiscal agreements(pactosfiscales) with the Federal
Governmentto change distortionaryprovincialtaxes and there is an active dialogue,
facilitated by the Bank and in collaborationwith the Fund, on further reform of the
federal-provincialtax sharing regime and provincialtax systems (co-participation);
all provinces are engagedin the national programto improvethe quality of secondary
education and support is being providedto improvethe managementof some
provincialpublic hospitals;and
all provincesprepare annual investmentand fiscal plans, and each year the Bank
conductsa review of provincialfinances and uses financialcriteria to determine
eligibility by the provincesto funds for capital investments;the only exceptions are
for social sector and for flood protection (in the Northeast, subject to recurring floods
that cost Argentinaas much as lpercent of GDP in losses).

89. Under the Second ProvincialReform Loans approved in 1997, the Bank has been
working with four poorly performingprovinces. These provinces had undertaken a first
round of reforms (e.g., bank privatization)and needed furtherreform of their finances as
well as health and education. In one case--Salta--the program was very successful; in
another case--Tucuman-there was a successfuloutcome but questions remain on
sustainability;and in two other cases-Rio Negro and San Juan-- the programs are
continuing but with considerabledifficulties,mainly because of the economic
deterioration and electionsin 1999. Nevertheless,during the 1996-98period, the PRL
provinces were able to show a 33 percent improvementin own-revenue collection, an
increase of 93 percent in current savings, comparedto a nine percent decline in other
provinces, and an increase in debt stocks of only two percent, compared to 19 percent in
other provinces. Emerging lessonssuggest that a direct relation with the provinces is
important to bring internationalexperienceand to mediate between federal and provincial
stakeholders. Putting the governorsat the forefront also has helped to improve project
performance more generally.
90. Argentina's transformationof infrastructureprovides an excellent exampleof
cooperationbetween IBRD and IFC, with each institutionperformingthe role in which it
has comparative advantage (see Box 11). Bank financing,moreover, has been critical in
introducing a novel way of public-privatemaintenancecontracting,under the National
Highway and Road Maintenanceand Rehabilitationprojects. This contracting
mechanism is now being replicated and has won a professionalaward for the Bank staff
and government officials who helped develop the system. There are other innovations:
for example,the use of public consultationsunder the Buenos Aires Urban Transport
Project and showing the viability of private investmentin smaller communitiesas well as
how to correct mistakes regardingthe impactof privatizationon the poor, under the recent
Water Sector Reform Loan. In the case of the Flood Rehabilitationand Prevention
projects, they were successful in preventing the repeat of economic loses of close to $ I

31

billion in the latest flood (1997/98),piloting a successfullow-cost, self-helphousing
constructionprogramand introducinglanduse regulations for flood zones.
Box 11: EBRD-IFC-MIGACOLLABORATION
Argentina represents one of the leading examplesof collaborationamong the WBG institutionsand of the impact that
these institutionscan have working together. In most cases,the collaborationhas been sequential: IBRD providing
support for up-front reformsthat set up the regulatoryand policy frameworkfor private participation,and IFC or
MIGA following with private investmentswhich demonstratethe viabilityof such participation. In other cases, the
involvementwas concurrent.
This represents a significantshift in strategyespeciallyon the side of the Bank since the 1970sand 1980s when IBRD
financed public enterprisesin the same sectors in whichIFC has investmentstoday and when IBRD financed lines of
credits for SMEsthrough publiclyowned developmentbanks. Since an attemptto.support capital market development
in the early 1990sfailed,the Bank's attention has been directedto policy and institutionalquestions,addressing legal
and regulatoryissues,banking supervision,and regulation,mainly under the recently completedCapital Market
Technical Assistanceprojectand the SSAL, plus a dedicatedtraining program for water sector regulators with the WBI
and a local university. IBRD's only recent direct support for the private sector has been a pilot cost-sharedExport
Promotion Program with SMEs,PREX, which has been fully disbursedand is beingevaluated, and the cost-sharing
scheme to reduce industrialpollution in two areas,under the on-goingPollution Managementproject.
IBRD and IFC are closely involved in Argentina's reform of infrastructure,the financial sector, provincial development
and the social sectors. The transformationof infrastructureprovidesa good exarnpleof working in sequence. IBRD
provided support for reform,sector studies,and technicalassistancewhich were criticalto providing an appropriate
setting. IFC advised on financial structuringand mobilizedprivate financingfor the first private investments in a
number of sub-sectors-power, water and sanitation, and railway networks. In the financial sector, IBRD's assistance
helped to strengthen the banking sector,and was followedby a number of IFC and MIGA operations. IBRD's
assistance for capital market development,particularlypension regulations,was also followedby IFC investmentin a
private pension fund. Examples of concurrent involvementare found in the socialsectors and provincial development.
IBRD's support is ongoing for both health and education,where IFC has already begun making investmentsin private
providers of social services. In the area of provincialdevelopment,IFC and IBRD are working together on an initiative
supporting economicdevelopmentin Tucuman. IFC's supportconsists of a projectpreparationfacility for firms in that
provinces as well as a line of credit in the Northwest region. Looking forward, collaborationis increasingin the areas
of improving productivityand creating employmentand the improved delivery of social services. IBRD and IFC will
continue to work closely on the financialsector and SMEs. For example, IBRD's support for introducing an
appropriate legal and tax frameworkfor leasing would be followedby IFC support for leasingcompanies. In
infrastructure,possible collaboration includessupportfor urban transport, and provincial private infrastructure.
Collaboration with MIGA is also increasing: MIGAhas recentlyparticipated in the CAS consultations with the private
sector, and is expectedto play an increasingrole in catalyzingforeign investmentwith risk enhancement products. In
addition, IFC and MIGA are jointly assessing a possible risk managementfacility to serve private sector firms in the
Region, includingthose in Argentina. The increasingcollaborationis supportedby the country office in Buenos Aires,
which is co-locatedby IBRD and IFC, with the IFC office also serving as a representativeoffice for MIGA.

91. Natural resource managementand environmentalconcerns have been addressed
mainly through small, pilot programs,often includinga mix of GEF and Bank support.
While the pilots themselves may be successfulor promising,overall change has been
limited and we have not attempted any broad institutionalreforms, an effort instead led by
IDB. There are several good examples of pilots: the on-goingNative Forests and BioDiversityproject; the pilot program for managing industrialpollution which focuseson
the partnering of small and large firms; and out-reach activities sensitizing local
authoritiesto the issuesof floodingand disaster management,air quality, and hazard
waste management in partnershipwith WBI. The Small Farmerproject is addressingthe
needs of poor farmersto access technologyand increaseproduction but is hampered by
32

budget limitations, while the ProvincialAgriculturalproject addresses the need for
improved managementof water resources for irrigation,as well as rural roads and
provincialinstitutional capacities. We expect to have a significant impact on commercial
forestry: the Forestryproject aims to develop appropriatemanagement for sustainable
commnercialforestry activities, one of Argentina's growth areas. The Bank's support for
developing environmentalcapacitiesat the provinciallevel in the area of mining, under
the two Mining TechnicalAssistanceProjects, has been particularly noteworthyin terms
of being able to establishthe context for this industryto take off in Argentina.
92. Private Sector Development. IFC has similarlybeen active in Argentina, with
support for infrastructure,exports, corporaterestructuring,financial intermediation,and
recently health and education,as well as providingcrucial supportduring the last two
external shocks. It has a track record of financingprojects in new and difficult sectors
(many being the first in emergingmarkets), such as water and sanitation,railways, health
care, and education. Recently,IFC approveda secondarymortgage securities market
project which is the first large-scalehousing finance operation and which attracted
widespread attention in the financialcommunity,and a liquiditybackstop facility for
middle-marketfirms. In tum, IFC benefits from the partnershipwith Argentina by being
able to transfer knowledgeto the rest of the world. MIGA has been active too, bringing to
the private sector its specializedservices,as highlightedbelow (see Box 12).
93. Because of Argentina's vulnerabilityto extemal shocks,the IFC has played an
importantrole during these episodes. During 1997-1999,IFC provided US$1.4 billion
(including syndication)-- the largest amount among official sources of finance to the
private sector. IFC support has been critical because Argentinadoes not have a large
official source of term finance, as distinct from Brazil. Term finance for the private sector
is still minimal and the public sector's financing needs tend to dominatedomestic financial
markets. Relative to externalprivate sources, IFC's advantagehas been: (i) its willingness
to invest even when internationalmarketsare reluctant; (ii) its long-term experience in
Argentina and in particular supporting new, difficult sectors;and (iii) its willingnessto
finance middle market firms.
94. IFC's program in Argentinahas been making a strong impact both in aggregatevalue
and in specific sectors. Investmentshave followedthe priorities set prior to this CAS,
namely, export-oriented industries,financial sector development,middle market firms,
infrastructureand social services. Overall, IFC's portfolio is of high quality and has
managed to withstand the difficultiesexperiencedover the last 18 months. As of February
2000, only 7.4 percent of the loan portfoliowas in non-accrual status and the interest
collection rate was a good 91.9 percent. These indicators compare favorably with the
non-accrualrate of 11.4percent and interest collection rate of 89 percent for the total IFC
portfolio. This is notable, as many investments in Argentina tend to be in frontier sectors,
and are often globalfirsts for IFC whose pioneering aspects can be replicated.

33

Box 12: MIGA's ACTIVITIES

Argentina is the second largesthost country for MIGA insured investmentsand it accounts for 11.1 percent of MIGA's
total Gross Exposure. Operationsare highly concentratedin the financial sector,which accounts for 76 percent of
MIGA's exposure in Argentina. The remaining is in infrastructure(2.2%), mining (3.6%),oil and gas (17%), and
services(2.7%). Between FY 92 and March 2000, MIGA has issued 28 guaranteesfor US$ 747 million. As of March
31, 2000, MIGA's outstandingportfolio consistedof 20 contracts with US$457 million gross exposure,of which
MIGA's net exposure is US$229 million. The total amountof foreign direct investmentfacilitatedto date in Argentina
is close to US$3 billion.In addition, MIGAhas insured anotherUS $ 62 millionthrough its CooperativeUnderwriting
Program(CUP). The total amountof foreigndirect investmentfacilitatedto date by MIGA is close to US$ 3 billion.
Taking into considerationits Treaty ReinsuranceAgreement,MIGA's guaranteelimit for Argentina is US$620 million,
and its per projectlimit is US$200 million. However,through its CooperativeUnderwritingProgram and facultative
reinsurance,MIGA could raisesubstantial additionalcapacityin the private market.
SECTOR:MIGA has insured 13operation in the financial sector for a total coverageof
FORTHEFINANcIAL
SUPPORT
US$561 million. Currently,there are ten active contracts.Gross exposure in the financial sector amountsto US$ 404
million including US$45 million under the CUP program: US$270million is in general banking,US$90 million in
leasing and US$43 millionin mortgages. By insuring leasing operations,a local subsidiaiy has been establishedto
provide support to food, agri-business,and healthcareindustries; financial servicesinclude leasing,factoring, and field
warehousing,and commercialservicesare for export, infrastructure,and transactioncycles. The latestguarantee was'
to finance long-term leasing of moveableequipment, focusingon SMEsin the agri-businessand financial sectors. In
the mortgage industry,MIGA has four active operations;one on middle incomehousing. The last mortgageoperation
was a guarantee of US$100 million to a companyoffering 30 year mortgages at 9.5 percent financing, excluding fees.
MIGA's investmentmarketing serviceshave been active in Argentina. Local authoritiesare
INvEsTMENrT
PROMOTING
being assisted in improvingthe framework for attractingForeign Direct Investment,and more than 80 Argentine
organizations use IPAnet. IPAnet harnesses the informationresources of the Internetto exchange informationabout
investments worldwide. In FY 99, MIGAconducted two workshopson best practicesin attracting FDI, one in Mar del
Plata and the other in Mendoza. The workshopsfocusedon strategy,building partnerships,and techniques for effective
investment promotion. This was the first time that MIGA had offeredthis service to provincial governments.

Renewing the Country Strategy

95. Given the continuing challengesfaced by Argentinaand progress by the Bank in
supporting past efforts, the proposed Bank Group Strategyfor FY 01-04 builds on the
strengths of the existing program (see Box 13). It would continueto focus on insuring
that the poor share in developmentand promotingequitable, sustainedgrowth. IBRD's
last CAS set three main priorities that we proposeto renew: (i) enhancing social
development, includingpoverty alleviationand hum.anresourcedevelopment; (ii)
improvingthe public sector's performance and institutionalcapacity,particularly at subnational levels; and (iii) consolidatingstructural reforms, including public finance, labor
markets and the financial sector. IFC's focus would be closely aligned with that of the
Bank and include: improving accessto investmentfinancing for companiesthat will
create growth and employment,supportingactivity which demonstratesthe tangible
benefits of growth and reform, and supportingfrontier activities which could be replicated
in other countries. MIGA would support the strategywith its guaranteeand investment
promotion services.

34

Box 13: OED's Country EvaluationUpdate
A Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE), updatingthe 1996Country Assistance Review, was completed in May 2000.
It concluded that the Bank's financial assistanceto Argentina during the 1990's was arnongthe best Bank-wide and
represented a drarnatic improvementover the past. In addition,the Banksupport was very cost-effectivein terms of
both costs per project and per amount committed. Overalloutcome was rated satisfactory,and institutional
development impact as substantial in some areas. Whileproject sustainabilitywas rated at 98 percent for that part of
the portfolio already evaluated,there was concem giventhe vulnerabilityof the economy to external shocks and the
need to improve on poverty levelsand income distribution. Based on these vulnerabilities,the report indicated an
important role remainingfor the Bank, particularly for financial transfersduring the times of crisis. The report
indicated that considerationof graduatingthe country was premature despite the high level of per capita income and
recommendeda gradual withdrawalas vulnerabilitydeclines. It questionedthe value-addedof traditional ESW, but
recognized that it is vitally importantfor the Bank to maintain a minimum knowledge base. The CAE suggested that
ESW should increasinglybe in the form of short policy notes to assist in deliberationswith the authorities and engage
the broader society in dialogue and in a process of "leaming together". It also suggested that specific technical
assistanceand specializedadvice can be highly valuable. Finally, it recommendedthat the future program concentrate
cven more on social sectors and provincial reform, and not to neglectthe reforn of federal institutions.

Exposure, Net Flows

96. IFC's exposure in Argentinais currently the largest in terrns of net disbursed portfolio
and the second largest in terms of net held portfolio. As of February 2000, the net
disbursedportfolio in Argentina amountedto US$1.1 billion, accountingfor 11.4percent
of the total portfolio and 17.9 percent of IFC's net worth. IFC's policy guidelines for
single-country exposure are 12 percent of net portfolio (held or disbursed) and 25 percent
of net worth (disbursed). The presentexposure is close to the lower of these two
guidelines on a disbursed basis, although considerablybelow that limit on a committed
basis, only 9.8 percent of the total held portfolio. Exposure is expectedto be under 12
percent by end FY00.
97. MIGA also has exposure issues and it will be facing capacity constraintsin Argentina
in the next few years with only about $ 170 million remainingin gross capacity. Taking
into considerationits Treaty ReinsuranceAgreement, MIGA's guarantee limit for
Argentina in US$260 million, and its per project limit is US$ 200 million. However,
through its CooperativeUnderwritingprogram(CUP) and facultativereinsurance, MIGA
could raise substantial additional capacity in the private market.
98. On the other hand, the Bank's exposure with Argentina at 7 percent is within the
notional limit of 10 percent for a single country. The Bank is also well within exposure
limits in terms of the Bank's share of Argentina's debt and debt service. In the short-term,
repayment of the SSAL, concentratedin CY 2003 and 2004, would reduce exposure by
less than two percentagepoints. Reduction in the Bank's lending needs to take into
account the potentially negative consequencesof an abrupt decline in net flows over the
short term, increasing Argentina's needs to access external private markets during a
potentially difficult period.
Selectivity in Setting Priorities
99. Preparation of this CAS has been subject to two main considerations. First,
Argentina is a good client and has progressedrapidly but there is still much to do.
35

Argentina's vulnerabilityis a continuingconcern and it has a ways to go in terns of
improvingratios on debt, debt-to-exports,and current account deficits; its capital markets
remain underdevelopedas does credit. Moreover,social indicators lag seriously in some
areas. The second considerationis that its income levels place it in a category where
eventualgraduation from IBRD has to be anticipated. This is compoundedby fiscal
restraints at both the federal and provinciallevels that limit the amount of counterpart
funds and public debt.
100. Theseconsiderationspoint to a smaller programfocused on reducing vulnerability
and addressing unresolvedsocial and economicproblems includingregional economic
disparities. This calls for selectivity. For IBRD, the proposedprogram,in contrast to the
past, reduces our involvementin some infrastructuresub-sectors,such as transport, where
public budget,the private sector and IDB can take a leading role albeit expanding in other
sectors such as urban servicesfor the poor (see paras. 122-123for discussion of
comparativerole of IDB in Argentina). It reducesour effort in areas such as higher
educationwhere the policy divergenceis still large andjudicial reform where progress has
been slow. IBRD would by and large leave direct supportto the private sector, including
SMEs, to IFC and MIGA, while continuingto addresspolicy and institutional questions.
In light of both IFC's and MIGA's country exposure,selectivity will be crucial in order to
maximize support to meeting Argentina's developmentchallenges. The main priorities
for the proposed FY 0 1-04programare set out below.
101. ConsolidatingMacroeconomicReforms. The Bank Grouphas been an active
supporterof Argentina's reform effort. This will continueto be the case, albeit at a less
intense level in terms of lending but with the continuedmonitoring of compliance under
the SSAL (third and final tranche yet to be disbursed)and monitoringof the financial
sector. Becauseof Argentina's vulnerabilityto externalshocks, the Bank Group would
remain ready to assist during such shocks,provided there is agreementon continued
policy reforms. Being abreast of economicconditionsand assessingprogress in policy
reform, therefore, remain a key part of the proposed program. Provincial reform,
described below, is proposed as the main operationalfocus.
102. Managing Social Risks. Argentina's vulnerability and the need to improve
selected social indicatorspoint to a strong presence in the area of managing social risks.
The Bank's past efforts have focused on introducing new social programs during time of
economic stress, such as TRABAJAR,or addressingparticular needs, such as the LIL for
Drug Prevention. The next phase of support will take this approachfurther by developing
an explicit social risk management frameworkand working toward program consolidation
and simplification,an area highlightedduring our CAS consultations. Work has already
started on identifying vulnerablegroups (Table 4). A registry of beneficiaries, developed
with IDB support, has been piloted and supported under the SSAL.: Government
commitmentto consolidationand simplificationof its social programs should enable them
to enhance the efficiency and effectivenessof social expenditures. As such, agreement in
this area could lead to includingpolicy/programchanges in a reform operation under a
high case scenario. This will also respondto the concernsfor better monitoring and
transparency.

36

103. The intention is also to continue to help improvethe cost-effectivenessand
targeting of Argentina's social programs, notablythrough AAA to evaluatenutrition and
job training, identify high priority socialprograms for times of economiccrisis with
particular attention to gender dimensions,and assess institutionalcapacities in the social
sectors. We are also exploring ways, through AAA, in which the concept of social capital
can be used to enhance program effectiveness,particularly for communitydevelopment.
104. Concomitantly,the goal is to continueto support the design and implementation
of innovative programs,through TA and investmentlending, that address the specific
needs of particular vulnerablegroupsand/or demonstrateeffectiveways of delivery. As
identified in the povertyassessment and gender analyses,familycapacity development is
one of these areas and we are proposinga LIL for a pilot program. In addition, the rural
poor have largely been ignored. The ongoing nationwideSmall Farmer Project
(PROINDER) and a LIL with Indigenous Peoples (expected to be approved in June 2000)
could be followed up with more regionallyfocused efforts and complementedby support
for infrastructure. The need to include indigenouspeoplesin our program was clearly
expressed during the CAS consultations. In the Voices of the Poor, infrastructurewas
cited as one of the major needs of the rural poor.
Table 4: Managing SocialRisk in Argentina:Main Risks and Policy Responses
Age group/
Main Risk

Role for Other
Programs

Role for Social Protection

Social Insurance
0-5
Stunted development

PHC Services
Pre-schooleducation

6-14
Low educationquality
15-24
Low secondaryschool
completion

Improveprimary
schoolquality
Improvesecondary
schoolaccess/quality

25-64
Low income
(unemployment/under
employment)
65 and Over
Low income

Labor-intensive
growth and labor
marketreforms

General Population
Low accessto/quality of
healthcare

Provisionof health
services.

Low housing quality

Mortgagefacilities,
infrastructure
investment

Social Assistance
EarlyChild
Development
Programs(ECD)
Scholarship/Retumto
school incentive
programs

Unemployment
insurance
Socialsecurity
(contributory
pensions)
Healthinsurance

Workfare/income
transfers
Non-contributory
pensions(income
transfer)

37

400,000ind.
1,000,000poor

100,000ind.
400,000 poor
800,000ind.
3,750,000poor
24,000ind.
200,000poor
1,700,000ind.
6,000,000poor

Housingsubsidies

Note: "hh" meanshouseholds.

Number of
Indigent & Poor
Not Covered

200,000hh.ind.
800,000hh. Poor

105. Education. Educationstands at the center of Argentina's effort to reduce poverty
and the Bank's ongoing supporthas focused on equity and reform of secondaryeducation.
Theseprograms need to continue and furthersupport is proposed for the Provinceof
Buenos Aires with another investmentloan. The focus on Buenos Aires is justified
because of the numberof students and its good implementationrecord. Since most
provincesbadly need to enhancethe efficiencyof their educationspending, this area will
be pursued through provincialreform operations;thesewill also pilot efforts to grantmore
autonomyto the school level and alter the ways educationbudgets are constructed. The
demand for investments in secondaryeducation,nevertheless,remains very large: the
new administrationis launching an initiativeto strengthensome 6,000 poor schools at a
total cost of $600-900 million. The IDB is discussinga possible project and there may be
an opportunity for parallel investmentlendingby the Bank.
106. Supportingthe objectiveof stimulatingprivate initiatives in educationand
improving the relevanceand efficiencyof higher education,IFC has financed two private
universities and expects more opportunitiesin this area. We also expect to follow up our
work on higher educationwith AAA for the time being, notably on the continuing effort
to make higher educationmore diverse,more relevantand more equitable. As a first step,
AAA will examinehow best to address the needs of youths and adults, who may have
dropped out of school, to help us to understandthe role and needs of informal education,a
high priority expressedduring the CAS consultations.
107. Health. The Bank has played a major role in supportingefforts to reform health
care. These efforts show promisebut are still partial. At this juncture, we are renewing
our consensus with the Federal Governmentand the provincesand developinga more
integrated approach. A key priority is working on ways to integratethe system, especially
primary care and maternal-childhealth services. Attention also needs to be paid to
renewing the reform effort started in 1995on health insurance,including further
consolidationand reform of provincial insurancefunds, openingcompetition with other
Obras and private insurance funds. Agreementwith the Governmenton these issues could
form the basis for policy change to be included in a reform operation under a high case
lending scenario. These efforts would also be supported in the provincialreform
operations. Similarly,the Bank's supportfor the developmentof insurance for the
uninsured is beingjointly pursued through the provincialreform operationsand the recent
LIL for Health Insurancefor the UninsuredPoor. In support of the objective to improve
quality and cost effectiveness,IFC has financeda private hospital in Cordoba,which was
the first health sector investmentin the region. As noted above,IDB is supporting
primary care and there is opportunityfor us to worktogether on an integrated health
investmentprogram.
108. Infrastructure. Despiteimportantadvancesin this area, infrastructureremains
underdevelopedand a sustainableapproach to financingfuture investments is urgently
required. However, the fiscal situation constrainspublic investmentwhile private sector
participation,which worked well in regards to concessioning,may need a different
approach as the amounts and risks associatedwith greenfieldoperationsare higher. It
may be that there is now an opportunityto pursue Bank lending and/or guarantees, along

38

with MIGA for example, or some other mix of public-private financing. AAA will help
us to assess the situation and devise an appropriatestrategy which we could then support.
IFC's initiatives will focus on frontier areas-projects in more difficult sub-sectors (e.g.,
urban transport), innovativecredit enhancementtransactions, and sub-sovereign
infrastructure. Future concessionswill have to addressexplicitly the issues of
transparency, equity especiallyservice to the poor, complianceand investmentby the
concessionaires,and tariffs levels.
109. Water resource management,based on recent Bank analyticalwork, has emerged
as an area requiring significantattention, both to reduce costs and to curb degradation.
Needs cover water supply and sanitation,ground water management,flood control,
drainage, and irrigation and we envisage future supportto focus initially on institutional
capacity building, including developmentof tradablewater rights with incentivestowards
efficient and sustainablewater use, and a watershedapproach integrating managementof
water, soils and cultivation. Other areas include privatizationand modernizationof
irrigation and urban drainage which could be supported with investment lending.
110. Potential exists to do more for the urban and rural poor. However, the Bank has
not been involved in low cost housing since the early 1990s,when an operation with
FONAVI was cancelled for poor performance after 10 percent of the loan was disbursed.
In the meantime, IFC and MIGA have helpedto develop the market for housing
mortgages; IDB has provided support for slum upgrading(its barrios program); and our
Flood Rehabilitationand Protectionprojects have used a highly successful voucher, selfhelp system. Both these latter programs could be expanded if FONAVI were restructured
as the needs are considerable.
111. On municipal services,the Bank and IDB have been mainly helping with
institutional improvementsand investmentsin urban streets-in the IDB's case, in the
larger metropolitan areas, and in the Bank's, in selected smaller municipalities with
reasonable success but on a limited scale. In order to gauge if and how to gear up these
activities, we propose to undertake a comprehensivereview of the delivery of municipal
services and municipal finances. Building on that work, an urban infrastructure
investment project could focus on slum-upgrading,improvementof urban services for the
poor, and urban transport and traffic managementprograms. Similarly, followingAAA,
an investment project targeting the needs of rural infrastructure(wells, road access,
drainage, community services,etc) could be part of the programn.As expressed during the
CAS consultations,these programs should be regionallyshaped and locally implemented.
112. Environment and SustainableDevelopment. The Bank has been working on a
variety of environmentalconcerns, rangingfrom ozone depletion,fisheries management,
coastal contamination,marine management,commercialforestry, mining, native forests
and national parks, providingboth Bank loans and GEF grants and support via an IDF
grant. We will continue to seek out opportunitiesto addressparticular "hot-spots" such as
mining contaminationand other hazardous wastes with a possible investment loan, to
exploit synergies between sustainable developmentand infrastructure,particularly in the
area of water resource management, and to expand the use of GEF grants as a

39

complementto national programsand to innovate on global issues. Our continued support
will be importantin the area of sustainablemanagementfisheries and maritime resources,
as strongly advocatedduring the CAS consultations. We also plan to pursue the issue of
crop/disasterinsurancewith AAA as a complementto our work on flood prevention.
113. Governance.The new administrationis expectedto bring about several changes
and enhanced public ethics, transparencyand accountabilityare now in the forefront.
Admittedly,moreneeds to be done in the judiciary, especiallyon appropriate
infrastructure,judicial independence,legal registriesand legal training but this area has
been slow to changeand our efforts under the ongoingModel Court Developmentproject
have not yet producedconcreteresults. On the other hand, a recent review of federal
procurement,accessto information,and the govermment'sinvestigativecapacity has
identified actionsthat could be included in an anti-corruptionprogram. We are embarking
on a ProcurementAssessmentwith the Government'sfull support, and anticipatethat
there will be interest in putting this into action. In the past we have supported public
sector modernizationand the new administrationhas asked that we support the design and
implementationof a performance based managementsystem for the federal government,
with complete transparency. Instead of a new loan, we propose to restructurethe ongoing
Y2K TechnicalAssistanceloan which ultimatelyproved not to be needed. For its part, the
IDB is preparingan operationfor enhancingpersonal security with activities in crime
prevention and domesticviolence.
114. Private SectorDevelopment. The Bank Group's strategy in this area has
focused on enhancing the frameworkfor private sectordevelopment,helping to enhance
access to credit, capital market development,and removing impedimentsin infrastructure,
labor markets, and the judicial system. In line with this overall approach,IFC is giving
priority to frontier sectors which could be replicated in other countries(see more details in
the PSS), including the following: (i) help developdomestic financial markets to broaden
and deepen intermediation; (ii) help developprivate provision of social services; (iii)
support private infrastructurein frontier areas, and/or less developedprovinces; (iv)
support companies that lack access to term financing, mainly middle market firms and
SMEs; (v) help develop innovativerisk enhancement,structuredfinance to improve
access by firms to external capital and reduce financing costs; and (vi) support potential
growth areas, such as informationtechnology. IFC's strategy is conditionedby several
factors. First, external shockshave amplifieddifferences in access to financing between
blue chip and middle-marketfirms/SMEs. Second, demonstrationthat the benefits of
reform (such as growth in employmentand wages, and increased access to social services)
can be broadly shared is needed in order to sustain support. Third, as a consequence of
rapid implementationof the country strategy,IFC's portfolio is approaching the lower of
its two single countryexposure guidelines.
115. In the coming years, MIGA plans to diversify activities in Argentina in order to
reduce exposure in the financial sector. Nonetheless,it plans to continue activities in that
sector given the country's needs, especiallyfocusing on SMEs and housing finance, and
potentially for the health sector. MIGA is planningto be active in areas such as water and
sanitation,power, transport,manufacturingand others, consistentwith the CAS
objectives. Investors have expressed interest in coverage for banking, oil and gas, real
40

estate, and infrastructure. In addition, MIGA will seek to support Argentinean
investmentsin other developingcountries, both through its guaranteeprogram and
IPAnet. Investment marketingserviceswill continue to be provided to the provinces.
116. During the consultativeprocess, supportwas expressed for more Bank Group
focus on regional economiesand SMEs. Invariably,directed and subsidizedcredit was
suggested as the response. However,the Bank abandonedthis approach in the late 1980s,
in view of the failure of these operationsand their negativeimpact on financial market
developmentin Argentina. At this point, we propose to look for more innovative waysto
support SMEs, beginningwith analyticalwork on informalityboth from an economic and
social perspective. As noted above, IFC continuesto support firms that are too small to
attract foreign capital; support for SMEs will more likely take the form of additional lines
with domestic financialintermediaries,such as leasing companies. The less developed
provinceshave been one of IFC's priorities,and it has made available a project
developmentfacility and credit line for SMEs in Tucuman. IFC is currently reviewing a
provincial water project in Santa Fe.
117. Provincial Reforms. An overarchingissue for the provinces is the question of
federal-provincialrevenue sharing. This is exceedinglycomplex and difficult to resolve
as no province wants to lose resourcesdue to any change in the present arrangement
despite its flaws. We are renewingthe efforts started under the SSAL on an acceptable
change in the system, and continue to offer technical support. We would consider
expanding our adjustmentassistanceto facilitate implementationonce an agreement is
reached. In the meantime, the approachto provincialreform piloted under the Second
Provincial Reform loans (PRL II) is emerging as a powerful vehicle for promoting sector
reforms in health and educationas well as fiscal sustainability. As such, they are
important complementsto efforts in these areas at both the national and provincial levels.
118. It is proposed that this area constitutethe mainstay of the Bank's program,
amounting to about 45 percent of the total. This constitutes the reactivation of the series
of provincial adjustmentloans which were interruptedby the external shock in 1998-99.
The PRL II program has attracted the interest of provinceskeen to embark on reforms at
the start of their new mandate The proposed Catamarcaoperation would be the first of
the next round. Additional candidatesare Cordoba,the Province of BuenosAires, and
Santa Fe, with other provincesto be considered later. These efforts would be directly
supporting reforms in provincesrepresenting 60% of Argentina's poor (NBI measure).

119. At the same time, the multi-purposeProvincialDevelopment Projects-the
second of which is almost fully committed-have constituteda useful vehicle for reaching
all of the provinces, and prompting institutional capacityand investments across a broad
range of areas. A third such investmentproject is proposed,with increased attention on
attaining core fiscal, administrationcapacities and accountability. Only those provinces
that are able to meet basic fiscal criteria are eligible for financing for new investments,
other than in the social sectors and flooding where social considerations are paramount.
120. As the reform agenda advancesto the next level of government-the
municipalities-we propose to address this question,building on our on-going operation
41

and future analyticalwork. This could lead to an adjustmentoperationwhich could
provide supportto selectedprovinceswhich have already undertakensubstantialreform at
the provincial level or otherwiseare in fiscal balance,to institutereforms of revenuesharingand fiscal/institutionalrelations betweenthe respectiveprovince and its
municipalities. Given the large needs for supportingprovincialand possible municipal
efforts, the Bank is seekingto increaseits collaborationwith the IDB.
ComparativeRoles of OtherMultilateralInstitutions
121. InternationalMonetaryFund. As highlightedearlier,an agreement on a threeyear, $7.4 billion Stand-Byarrangementwas approvedin March 2000. The target 2000
deficit for the Federal Governmentis $ 4.7 billion (1.6 % of GDP) and there is an
indicativetarget deficitof $2.2 billion for the consolidatedprovincialgovernments,and a
binding incrementalpublic sector debt target for both the provincesand the federal
governnent of $5.4 billion. Under the arrangement,the Governmentwill have immediate
access to $ 1.4 billion but it is treatingthe new arrangementas precautionary. As in the
past, in the case of an emergencyboth institutionswould be called to assist. Bank-Fund
collaborationhas recentlyintensifiedon provincialfinances. Staff have frequent
discussionson the provincesand decentralizationin Argentinasince the provinces have
been the major focus of our assistanceprogramin recent years and are now an increasing
part of the Fund's. Fiscalconditions attachedto our future provincialreforn loans will be
consistent with the Fund's programtarget. In the past, we have collaboratedon other key
issues-notably labor reform and the financialsector.
122. Inter-AmericanDevelopmentBank. The IDB is a major partner with the Bank
in Argentina. There are numerousexamples of sharing sectors and/or locations. The
main differencestend to be the Bank's accessto global knowledge,analysisof policy
issues and activepresence on global issues. At present, the Bank also has an advantage
providingquick-disbursingfunds, especiallywith the provinces. On the other hand, IDB
practicesregarding a broaderdefinitionof counterpartfunding give the IDB a clear
advantagein investmentlending in some cases. It also can finance smallprojects, using
local currency,and a broad mandatein areas such crime and violence;it has been
particularlyinnovativein the social sectors.
123. In lending to the private sector, IDB is a close second to IFC. IDB's lending has
been concentrated in infrastructure,whereas IFC financingis diversifiedacross sectors
with a track record of financingprojects in new and difficult sectors,such as water and
sanitation,railways,health care, education,and housingfinance, where few other agencies
have developed experience. IFC is also able to finance middle market firms and credit
lines for these firms through the bankingsector. IFC's main disadvantageis that, due to
countryexposure constraints,its capacityin supportinglarge transactionsis limited.
An Evolving Relationship
124. As Argentina's social and economictransformationhas evolved, so has the role of
the Bank Group from the time when we were a vital part of the effortto stabilize and
restructurethe economyto when our support can be increasinglytargetedand focusedon
42

vulnerable groups and those not yet benefitingfrom Argentina's new found stabilityand
economicgrowth. For this reason, the IBRDprogram is planned to be reduced from the
levels achieved during the 1990s: for FY 00-04, the program would stand at $3 billion
(base case). This would be roughly half the average lent throughoutthe 1990s.
125. This strategyrecognizesthat Argentina's transformationis not yet complete and
that it will take more time and effortto address a complex set of economic,institutional
and social issues. Some of these are part of the unfinishedagenda from the 1990s and
others are part of the process of adaptingto the global economy. But continued lending to
Argentina is only justified to the extent that the country is fully committed to addressing
these issues. Thus, concretepolicy actions will play a role in the triggers, set out in Table
5, defining the high/base/lowcases. Given the constraintsof the ConvertibilityPlan,
strong economicmanagement is essential. Shouldthat waiver, the Bank response would
reduce its assistanceto a low case lending scenario, consistingof social sectorprotection
activities while working to assist Argentinain rebuilding confidenceand improving
performance. The amount of the low case would vary depending on when and if the
triggers come into play. On the other hand, a high case scenario of up to $500 million in
additional adjustmentlending could be triggered by progressin sector reform efforts in
areas such as health insurance(para. 107), social protection(para. 102), pension reform or
reform in federal-provincialrevenue-sharing(para. 117). The move to the high case
scenario would take into account progressmade in addressingthe issues of the unfinished
reform agenda, includingprogress towards a revenue-sharingarrangement,as well as the
scope and budgetary impactof the reforms that could be supportedby the Bank. Given
Argentina's continued vulnerabilityto external shocks,we also plan to be ready to provide
special support, as in the past, in conjunctionwith other financial institutions.6

Possible scenarios (not developedin this CAS), include (i) an external shock that constrains Argentina's
ability to access the intemationalfmancial markets, such as in 1995,and in 1998/99. If this should reoccur,
6

the Bankwouldtake thisas an opportunityto advancereformsandmitigatesocialcosts. TheIMF's
contingent credit facility would be expected to play a greater financialrole in responding to such shocks; or
(ii) a very severe externalshock, resulting in the abandonmentof the ConvertibilityPlan under crisis
conditions, could create a wave of defaults and capital flight. In this instance,the Bank would refocus
mainly on social protection, restructuringof the economy,and the financial system. Such developments
would be reported to the Board in a CAS Progress Report.

43

Table 5: ProgramTriggers
TriggersLeading to High Case

Base Case

Triggers Leadingto Low Case

Base Case triggers Plus:

Macroeconomic framework
acceptable to the Bank

Significant deviation from the law of fiscal
responsibility and in managing extemal debt
(>55 percent of GDP) under conditions of
normal access to capital markets

No major problems in counterpart financing at
the provincial level and agreement on new
revenue sharing arrangement in line with
principles agreed under the SSAL or agreement
on consolidation and simplification of social
assistance programs, or agreement on deepening
reform in health insurance, or agreement on
further reform to the pension system. The move
to the high case scenario would take into account
progress towards a revenue-sharing arrangement,
as well as the scope and budgetary impact of the
reforms.

Satisfactory portfolio
performance. No major
problems in counterpart
financing plus specific triggers
for programs, e.g. reforms in
housing, public universities,
provincial-municipal revenue
sharing.

Unsatisfactory portfolio performance as
indicated by more than 30 percent of the
portfolio with problems.

Satisfactory performance of
Monitoring Indicators for
Program

Failure to progress in labor reform, coparticipation (ie continued discussions),
strengthening of social safety net (ie food
programs) and governance (ie transparency
and procurement)

The indicators selected to assess Argentina's progress in addressing its continuing
126.
development challenges, as set out in Table 6, point to the direction that Argentina intends
to take and the goals that it hopes to realize over the medium term, namely, sustained
economic growth, reduced vulnerability, reversal in income and poverty indictors, and
becoming at par in critical social areas.
The period covered under this CAS-FY 01-04--coincides with Argentina's
127.
electoral cycle and will provide the next adrninistration the opportunity, jointly with the
Bank, to assess progress and redefine priorities and the role of the Bank accordingly.
Broadly speaking, these are also the indicators for gauging the continued relevance and
contribution made by the Bank and our performance. More specific performance
indicators are provided in Annex 9. The Bank's performance would also be evaluated by
way of additional client surveys and consultation with our client and civil society more
generally. Regular progress reports would be submitted to the Board.

44

Table 6: Monitoringthe Progress
(I) Economicand FinancialVariables
(a) GDPgrowth
(b) Credit Ratings

InitialValues

Predicted/TargetValues

-3.1 percent(1999)
BB for S&P

Average4.5 percent
Investmentgradefor Government
paper

13.9percent
29 percent(urban)
0.49
52%
18per 1,000
65 percent

< 10 percent
<22 percent
0.46
70%
12per 1,000
87 percent

(II) SocialIndicators
(a) UnemploymentRatc
(b) PovertyRate
(c) GiniCoefficient
(d) SecondaryEducationGraduationRate
(e) Infant MortalityRate
(f) Access tosafe water

Risks
128. As detailed above in the section on Consolidating Macroeconomic Reforms
(paras. 50-54), Argentina remains vulnerable, with deteriorated debt indicators and weak
fiscal performance, as it comes out of the last recession. This vulnerability generates a
number of possible--but not probable-risk scenarios, including:
*

an external shock could constrain Argentina's ability to access the international
financial markets, a scenario faced in 1995, and in 1998/99. As in the past, under such
a situation, Argentina would need to seek financial support from international
financial institutions to help restore confidence. In the future, the IMF's contingent
credit facility is expected to play a greater role in responding to such shocks.
Assistance would also be required to help mitigate the social costs of adjustment and
to address key issue to reduce vulnerability and enhance confidence, taking advantage,
as in the past, of enhanced political support for reform;

*

a very severe external shock, resulting in the abandonment of the Convertibility Plan
under crisis conditions, could create a wave of defaults and capital flight. Under such
circumstances, there would be a need to focus on social protection, restructuring the
economy, and the financial sector. Given the likely magnitude of needed support,
burden-sharing among international financial institutions would be important; or

*

a long term risk that Argentina's competitive situation erodes, leading to stagnation
and high social costs. This is largely a internal political risk in that it would represent
a failure to continue to implement the unfinished agenda of reforms. This scenario
would call for actions similar to those described under the severe external shock
scenario.

45

Despitetheserisks, Argentinahas shown itselfto be a strongperformeTthat has
undertakenprofoundreforms and survivedtwo serious externalshocks. Each time, the
economyhas recovered. Thus,the recordis solid. The Bank would continueto support
efforts to help Argentinastrengthenits policyframeworkto reducethese risks.

JamesD. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Sven Sandstrom

Peter Woicke

Washington,DC, September8, 2000
Attachments

46

Annex A

ARGENTINA: PRIVATESECTOR STRATEGY
I.

Context for Private Sector Strategy

1.
Increased private sector role. A decade of economic reform has introduced a
fundamental shift in the role that the private sector plays in economic development in Argentina.
Privatization and more liberal policies have brought about increased private sector activities and
efficiency gains, solidifyingthe foundation for higher growth. Despite a series of downtums that
followed external shocks such as the Tequila and Asian crises, the Argentine economy has
achieved high growth. This growth has been accompaniedby significant increases in the share of
private investment in GDP (Table 1), with the share of public sector investment declining during
the period. The private sector presently accounts for 73 percent of GDP, and is the main source
of growth.
Table 1
Argentina: Investmentsas a Share of GDP (%)
Year
GDI/GDP
Private I/GDP
Public l/GDP

1990
14.0
9.4
4.6

1991
14.6
12.7
1.9

1992
16.7
14.9
1.8

1993
18.2
16.6
1.7

1994
19.9
18.1
1.8

1995
17.9.
16.4
1.5

1996
18.1
16.8
1.3

1997
19.4
17.9
1.5

1998
19.9
18.2
1.7

GDPGrowthp.a.
-2.4 12.7
11.9
5.9
5.8
-2.8
5.5
8.1
3.9
GDI:GrossDomesticInvestmnent;
Private1:Privatesectorinvestnent;Publici: Publicsectorinvestment
2.
Expanded role and contribution of private infrastructure. Argentina has virtually
completed privatization and private concession of infrastructure services in most key sectors at
the Federal level, and achieved significantefficiency gains. The sectors that have been privatized
or have introduced private participation at the Federal level include power, gas,
telecommunications,transport (ports, airports, railways, toll roads, airlines), postal services, and
water and sanitation. Privatization generated cumulative investment commitmentsby the private
sector, which were estimated at US$12.4 billion. Though some contract issues associated with
earlier concessions have surfaced, a recent study for Argentina found that the privatization and
regulatory improvementshave brought significant economicgains ($2.3 billion, or 0.9 percent of
GDP) to Argentina (see para. 24 for more details). Many Provinces are also moving towards
privatization, increasingthe share of private sector activity in infrastructure.
3.
Key development issues remain. Argentina is, along with Chile, one of the most
developed countries in the region, and has been a leader in undertaking the first generation of
economic reform. Through the economic reform process, Argentina has made great strides in
enabling the private sector. As noted in the CAS, reform has helped bring about a dramatic
increase in the size of the economy (about 6 percent p.a. during the 1990s)and modest inflation
(less than I percent in 1998). However, many (29 percent of the population) live in poverty,
unemployment is high (at about 14 percent) and access to basic infrastructure and social services
remains uneven. Much remains to be done to facilitate development, sustain high growth and
distribute the benefits of growth more broadly.
4.
Accelerated, equitable and broad-basedgrowth is critical to reduce poverty, enable more
of the population to participate in the gains from reform, and reduce the risk of major policy
reversals. The private sector plays a core role in pursuing this objective. Further improvements
in the environment for growth in the private sector, as well as a broader sharing of the benefits of
I In waterandsanitation,forexample,the privateconcessionaires
presentlyserveabouthalfthe Argentine
population.Thecoverageby the privatesectorwillincreaseto nearlythree-quarters
of the population
whenProvincialconcessions
that are currentlyin processare implemented.
-I-

growth, are priorities in the WIMYsLAN lor Argentina. In tnis context, key private sector
development issues in Argentina include:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Improving access of the private sector (particularly middle-market firms and
SMEs) to long-term financing for modernization and expansion, and enabling
firms to ride through major closures in external financial markets;
Continuing second generation reforms, and extending them to the Provinces,
including in infrastructure;
Helping increase the role that the private sector plays in sectors previously in the
public sector domain (e.g. social sectors, housing); and
Improving the business environment, in particular skills development, labor
markets and the judicial system.

5.
The Private Sector Strategy (PSS), which forms an integral part of the WBG's overall
CAS for Argentina, provides further details of the WBG's strategy in addressing the priorities.
Section 11of the PSS provides an overview of the Argentine private sector and a diagnosis of the
principal issues for private sector development for Argentina. Section III details the WBG's
strategy for addressing these principal issues.
H.

Private Sector DevelopmentPriorities

6.
There are four key characteristicsof the Argentine private sector, which influence
the WBG's strategy:
(i)
(Corporates)a coexistence of increasinglyefficient blue chip firms, which generally
have access to long-term financing, and mid-sized and smaller firms which are less
efficient and modernized,and have little access to capital;
(ii)
(Financial sector) a strong banking sector (in terms of capital structure, and
regulatory and supervisory framework), that is however not extending credit to the
private sector, given the current fiscal/interestrate situation, and still underdeveloped
capital markets;
(iii)
(Widening scope) a widening scope for private sector participation-- new areas
which have been shifted from the public sector (infrastructure), or opened to the
private sector (social sectors, housing finance) -- and emergent areas for potential
growth (e.g., e-business); and
(iv)
(Remaining structural impediments) a relatively sound enabling environment
though with a few major weaknesses in infrastructure (particularly in the Provinces),
a shortage of key skills for a service-based economy, inflexibility in labor markets,
and an inefficient and unreliablejudicial
system.

Box 1 - Private Sector Consultations
Following the precedent of the CAS for

7.
Growth has been led by large firms.
Large firms have led much of the growth in the
private sector. Blue chip Argentine firms have
substantivall imptrove thueiproductiviy
oerm thae
substantially improved their productivity over the
past 5-10 years and shown their resilience under
difficult economic conditions brought about by
external shocks (in the case of the '95-96 peso
crisis, with substantial assistance from IFC).
Economic liberalization and improved efficiency
stemming from privatization of infrastructure have
helped them maintain competitiveness under the
fixed exchange regime, in spite of the devaluation in

- 2-

Brazil. the WBG undertook consultations
withabroadrangeofprivatesectoractorsin
Argentina, extending the consultation
process now common in CASs to the private
sector. Concurrentlywith the Group-wide
consultationprocess with large fora, IFC
and MIGA held meetings with private firms,
commercialand investmentbanks,
consultants, academics,and business
associations. Their views on the state of the
private sector, and prioritiesfor private
sector development, formedan important
element in shaping this PSS.

AnnexA
Brazil and the current strength of the US dollar. As shown in Figure I below, the efficiency in
manufacturing and infrastructure has improved, reflecting increases in productivity in large
manufacturingand privatizedinfrastructurefirms.
Figure 1
Unit Labor Cost 1991-1998
In constantpesos 1992=100(1)
115- 1991

1992

115

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

~~~~~~~~~~~~Services

110
105

80

_

/\

:65

Manufacturng

60

(1) Deflated by Manufacturing WholesalePrices
Prices

8.
Such productivity increases have been achieved through a combination of new
investments for modernizationand expansion, and rationalizationof workforce. These firms have
maintained access to long-term financing,which is critical for new investments. A conservative
balance sheet structure for most firms (see Table 2), and the existence of professional
management and a well-educatedworkforce,has helped maintain financial markets' confidence in
large Argentine firms' ability to weather a potential liquidity crisis. Rationalization has been
more visible in a number of newly privatized firms, particularly in infrastructure. This
rationalization, while necessary to improve efficiency and service, has an adverse impact on
employment, if not accompanied by growth of new firms and new labor opportunities, as has
been the case in Argentinato date.2 Then the net effect of reform can appear to be negative from
the standpointof employment.
Table 2
Mean CorporateLeverage(Debt/Equity)
in Selected Countries
Mean
Leverage

Rep.of Korea
Thailand
Indonesia
Malaysia
USA
Taiwan
Argentina

3.5
2.4
1.8
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.7

9.
Middle-market firms and SMEs lag behind. The rest of the corporate sector lacks
access to long-term finance, either domestic or foreign, falling behind in investments for
An estimateshowsthat employmentin largestatecompaniesfell from300,000in the 1980sto lessthan
50,000post-privatization
in mid-1990s.
2

- 3-

productivity increases. As shown in Figure 1, a lag is apparent in the service sectors (other than
banking and public utilities) in which many firms are smaller. Having come through the effects
of the Tequila crisis, some of these middle-market and smaller firms too have become more
efficient, and their low leverage has helped them weather crises. However, they lack access to
capital for further improving their productivity. The cost of financing (high interest rates) is
prohibitive for these firms to make new investments, and the domestic banking sector is not
lending to these firms (see below for the financial sector). Firms in less developed provinces lag
further behind in both governanceand management,and access to financial services.
Private investment - increasing but still not enough. As shown in Table 1, private
10.
investment (as percent of GDP) has been increasing in Argentina,but is still low level relative to
many other countries, as well as for sustaining high growth. Table 3 shows private investriientto
GDP ratios of a number of countries. Comparing Argentina's private investment with that of high
growth countries (such as Malaysia and pre-crisis Thailand and Indonesia), private investment in
Argentina probably needs to rise for achievingthe higher growth enjoyedby those countries.
Table 3
Private investment to GDP (percent)
(1997)

Privateinvestmentto GDP
15.3
18.4
20.4
21.0
22.0
22.1
24.1
30.9

Brazil
Argentina
Chile
Peru
Panama
Indonesia
Thailand
Malaysia

Unemployment remains a major issue. Slow growth in the non-blue chip corporate
Il.
segment has a major implicationfor unemployment. These firms will remain key players in job
creation3. As blue chip firms rationalize their workforce in their efforts to improve
competitiveness, and large privatized infrastructure companies continue to seek more efficient
delivery of services, middle-market firms and SMEs need to play a larger role in absorbing
employment through growth. In this context, improving access of these firms to investment
financing is critical for employment generation and broad-basedgrowth. Improving flexibility in
labor markets is also critical in this respect (see para. 33).
Figure 2
Unemploymentrate
20.0

.m_

15.0

10.0

I

5.0

91

92

93

94

-4 -

95

96

97

98

99e

Annex A
12.

Financial sector: Banks are strong. Argentine private sector banks have one of the

strongest capital structures among those in LAC, with a good regulatory and supervisory
framework, although there remain too many smaller and weaker banks. The top ten banks hold
about 70 percent of deposits in the system, and almost all the large banks are under foreign
ownership.
Table 4
Net worth to total assets ratios
Bankingsyst m in selected countries
Country
Networth/totalassets
Argentina

11.5%

Brazil
USA
Spain
Mexico

9.6%
6.9%
4.9%
3.7%

13.
Credit to the private sector is low. The Argentine banking sector, although much
stronger than before, is intermediatingto the private sector only a small fraction of savings,
compared with many developingcountries. Though increased over time during the 1990s, credit
to the private sector is presently at about 25 percent of GDP as shown below. This level is
strikingly lowerthan that of other regions, and even lower than that of other countries in the LAC
region which have a weaker banking system -- for example, Mexico. As noted in the CAS, the
lack of domesticcredit constitutesa seriousbottleneckfor small and medium sized firms.
Figure 3

Credit to privatesector as % of GDP
IMTotalCrediVGDP|
1.4.

0.64r
0.2-

*:

m

i;

o
0*

1(41~0

R

0 N

14.

~

m

Private banks are not extending credit. Under current economic conditions, banks are

taking a conservative lending stance, which has led to a contraction of credit to the private
sector.4 On the one hand, this conservatism has helped maintain the stability of the banking
system. On the other, this is severely limiting smaller domestic firms' access to operational and

investment financing (Table 5).

3 Data (1996) available from National Census indicate that small firms (with fewer than 25 employees)

alone account for 98% of business, and generate 60% of Argentina'sjobs.
4 With the economy beginningto recover, there haverecently been some signs of improvement,particularly
in mortgage lending.

-5-

Annex A

Table 5
ArgentineBanking Sector Credit
(Millions of pesos, percent)

1996

1997

1998

1999

Creditto Private Sector

54,939

64,234

72,206

70,582

6.7
12.2

16.9
10.1

12.4
9.2

- 2.2
10.6

Changelastyear(%)
Badloans/bankcredit(%)
15.

I

Year

High interest rates, and the Government's fiscal requirements, are affecting private banks'

intermediation in two ways. First, with government paper bearing high yields, private banks
rationally do not lend to riskier private firms (which anyway could not afford such high interest
rates for their investment financing), and invest instead in 'risk-free' government paper. Second,
private banks do not have access to long-termfunding sources, due to this "crowdingout", as well
as to underdevelopeddomesticcapital markets.
16.
Dependence on external financing. Dependence on external financing, along with
weak domestic intermediation,is another major difficulty that the Argentine private sector faces.
This stems from a combination of low domestic savings (19 percent of GDP) and displacement of
the private sector by government borrowing (public sector deficits at 1.5 percent of GDP). This
could be a principal source of vulnerability for the Argentine private sector, as seen in the 1995
Tequila Crisis. Total private capital flows to Argentina remain stable, helped by the financial
markets' confidence in the ConvertibilityPlan and in 1999strong FDI flows, as shown in Table 6.
Table 6
Private Capital Flows to Argentina

(S million)

1997
4,924

Foreign Direct Investment2/

1993
2,059

1995
3,756

1996
4,937

PortfolioEquity

1,523 3,417 1,960

1,716

1,754

5,262 10,101 7,893 10,224
Private Creditors 3/
8,844| 15,998| 13,609| 16,877
Total
5.71
4.81
5.6
3.4
% of GDP
I/The 1999figures are estimates.

14,760
21,438
6.6

1994
2,480

1998 1999/I
4,289 18,417

74 - -10,560
13,115
17,478
5.1

10,582
18,439
n.a.

2/ Includesthe acquisitionof YPF(thecountry'slargestcompany)by Repsolof Spainat US$13billion.
3/ Includes private credit to the public sectorwith governmentguarantee.

Today's external market conditions favor top-quality credits (first, the government, and
17.
then top-tier companies). The declining private credit flows during the past few years suggest
that: (i) the Government is the dominant borrower; (ii) external debt flows even to top-quality
private firms have declined; and (iii) smaller firms are virtually closed out from the external
financial market. This implies that, without support, most Argentine firms will continue to have

difficulty raising investment capital in the short-to-medium term. It also implies that current
external market conditions are amplifying the differential access to financing that exists in the
Argentine corporate sector, making a broader sharing of benefits of growth even more difficult.
Structured finance, including various types of guarantees or other forms of credit enhancement,
will be increasingly important in the external markets, while further development of domestic
financial markets will be critical for smaller firms.
18.
Other sources of financing are under-developed. Non-bank financial sources
presently lack depth for playing a significant role in intermediating capital. Equity markets and
institutional funds, which are rnajor sources of capital in the developed markets, are still in the
process of development, although there has been some progress in recent years. As shown in

-6 -

AnnexA
Figure 4, Argentina'sequity market capitalizationis low at around 18 percent of GDP, compared
with other countries in LAC and other regions.
Figure 4
EquityMarket Capitalizationto GDP, 1999
180%
160%
140%
120%

i

100%
80%
60%
40%.
20%
0%

In Argentina,large firms, and some smaller ones, have relatively good and professional corporate
governance, although family holdings still dominate. Improvements in disclosure and
dissemination of financial and accounting informationof firms are needed to facilitate growth of
equity markets. Many smaller firms also need improvementsin governanceand management.
19.
Institutionalfunds, such as pension funds, life insuranceand mutual funds, are still in the
process of development, but with the recent reformwhich introduced private pension funds, they
are playing an increasing role in improving domestic savings and providing long-term funds.
Taken together, total assets of these institutionalfunds account for 7 percent of GDP. Total assets
under managementfor 16 private pension funds in the system stood at around $11.5 billion, or 3
percent of GDP (at December 1998),and continueto grow.
Figure 5
Growth in private pensionfund assets
(Assets Under Managementin US$ billions, growth in percent)
-;,,n
rv.

ne.t

.

14 MCD

s<ltso~~.

f.

i.

_

.....

Ir

Source:Superintendency
of privatepensionfundadministrators
-7 -

j... f

s1

AnnexA
Non-bank financing sources. Non-bankfinancial sources, such as leasing and factoring,
20.
are scarce in Argentina,and account for a very small part of financial activity in Argentina (Table
7), even though bank lending itself is at low levels. In economies with developed non-bank
financial intermediaries, smaller firms tend to gain access to credit through non-bank financial
institutions, as these institutions more readily lend to smaller clients than their bank counterparts.
To cut operating costs per loan, commercialbanks tend to prefer making large loans to lower risk
clients. They tend to lend on a basis of either an established banking relationship (with large
corporates) or well-secured collateral (such as fixed assets with good value). Non-bank financial
institutions tend to use a particular methodology(e.g. leasing) which can contain operating costs
while catering to a larger number of clients with smaller loans. They also tend to accommodate
risks of smaller firms that can offer as collateral only moveable assets, account receivables, or
other non-fixed assets. The fact that these types of financial services are fairly insignificant in
Argentina, combined with the low level of credit to the private sector from banks, is a major
impediment to growth and employment creation. Developing non-bank financial services is
critical for improving access to domestic financing in Argentina.
Table 7
Bank Intermediation, % of all Financial Assets
98%
Argentina
97%
Brazil
87%
Mexico
80%
India
64%
Malaysia
60%
Chile
47%
Japan
38%
Korea
23%
U.S.A.
Microfinance. Another "missing" area in the Argentine financial sector is microfinance,
21.
which is playing a major role in some other countries in LAC, such as Bolivia and Paraguay.
Observers in the microfinance industryview the Argentina microfinance sector as one of the least
developed in LAC, with few, if any, self-sustainable microfinance programs. The lack of
microfinance activity is a notable contrast to neighboring Bolivia, where there are several main
institutions operated and managedalong purely commercial lines, and earning sizable profits.
Potential areas for private sector-led higher growth. During the CAS private sector
22.
consultations, many commented on the importance of focusing not only on addressing present
weaknesses but also on building on areas of potential strengths in Argentina. Argentina generally
enjoys a better-educated workforceand higher income than its neighbors, and this could provide a
potential source of higher growth through developments in information technology and higher
value added activities. There have been some signs for supporting this view, for example in the
growth of retail e-business. Many participants in the consultationmaintained that higher growth
could be generated by focusing more on service-oriented, high value-addedactivities and less on
traditional "heavy" industries (e.g. automotive). In this context, they also noted that education
plays a particularly important role by providing technical and managerial information,
information technology, and a skilled workforce (see para. 26 below for more on education).
Widening scope of the private sector. Reform has widened the scope for private sector
23.
participation in infrastructure,social sectors and housing finance. This has not only increased the
role that the private sector plays in economic growth, but also has brought economic gains
through increased efficiency, particularly in infrastructure. This scope is expected to keep
expanding in the social sectors, housing, and provincial infrastructure, as the Government
continues to advance reform in these areas.
- 8-

Annex A
24.

Infrastructure. As noted earlier, Argentina has virtually completed privatization in most

key sectors at the Federal level, and achievedsignificant efficiency gains. Since the early 1990s,
Argentina has been a leader in the region in introducingthe private sector in infrastructure. The
private infrastructure program included a number of "leaders" in the region -- for example,
private water concession and postal services -- for which the WBG has provided policy advice,
technical assistanceand transaction support. The programhas significantlyincreasedthe role that
the private sector plays in infrastructure services in Argentina. Furthermore, private
infrastructurehas brought significanteconomic gains. In this regard, a recent stud? showed the
following three points.

First, the spillover effects from private operations of utilities has

amounted to $2.3 billion (or 0.9 percent of GDP), and their distribution benefits all income
groups.

On average these gains represent the equivalent of 41 percent of what households spend

on utilities. Second, the gains from effective regulation add up to almost $1 billion (or 0.35
percent of GDP). This represents 16 percent of the average utility bill. Third, the direct gains are

higher for the higher income groups,but indirect gains achievedthrough better regulation tend to
favor the poorest income groups. Private sector participation,and its contributions to efficiency,
is expected to continue to increase in Argentina, as the Government national infrastructure
program for the next three years proposes that 44 percent of infrastructure expenditures come
from the private sector.
Box 2 - WBG experiences in infrastructure privatization in Argentina

The WBG has long been involved in assisting Argentina's privatization program in
infrastructure.

With WBG assistance, more than ten infrastructure sub-sectors have been

privatized, in most cases in pioneering transactions. Argentina's transfornation of
infrastructure services provides a good example of collaboration between IBRD and IFC,
with each institution performing the role in which it has a comparative advantage. IBRD
lending, sector studies, and technical assistance were critical to providing the appropriate
setting. IFC advised on financial structuring and mobilized private sector financing for the

first private project in a number of sub-sectors. Notable examples for such IBRD-IFC
sequential involvement included: privatization in the power sector, the private concession
for water and sanitation in Buenos Aires, and privatization of railway networks. In each
case, IBRD's activity in policy and technical advice for privatization was followed by IFC's

financing for new investments of one or more of the privatizedcompanies in that sector.
25.
Private participationin social sectors. The Fiscal ResponsibilitiesLaw requires a zero
Federal deficit by year 2003. Under this condition, the Government's social spending will be
highly constrained. To address this issue, the Government has been making progress in
reforming social sectors, reducing public spending, and allowing private firms to play a larger
role in this area. In general, the private sector plays a larger role for the upper income segments,
helping the Governmentreduce the fiscal costs for this segment and re-allocate resourcesto focus
more on basic services for the lower income segments.
26.
Education sector. As noted in the CAS, the most importanttype of human development
investment in Argentina remains education, as the country's labor demands shift to higher skill
levels. The private sector will play a larger role for improving the delivery and quality of
education services. This is a critical area for Argentina, as shifts towards a more service-based
economy will put considerable pressure on skilled and managerial labor markets (see para. 22
above). The current system is not producing sufficient graduatesto fill the private sector's needs
in those areas. In public higher education, efficiency is low, capital investments are insufficient,
"WinnersandLosersfromthe Privatization
andRegulationof Utilities:Lessonsfroma General
EquilibriumModelof Argentina,"Chisari,Estache,andRomero(TheWorldBankEconomicReview Vol.
13, No.2)
5

-9-

AnnexA
the composition and qualification of faculty are often inadequate, and most public universities
have little interaction with the labor market. Argentina is the only major country in the region
that still offers completely free university education with open enrollment. As a result, public
universitiesstill dominate higher education. Although the private sector has nearly a third of the
total market at the secondary level, it has less than a fifth at the university level. The process for
obtaining a Government license has historically been difficult for private universities. The
process of approval started to become more open in the 1990's, and the number of universities
and students at private universities has been growing.6 Further development of tertiary education
and management and technical training will be critical for Argentina. Much will come from the
private sector, which will face a formidable challenge attracting financing in an area perceived as
too risky for most banks.
Box 3 - IFC activity in the social sector
Increased private sector opportunities have prompted IFC's involvement in the Argentine social
sectors. At this early stage of development of private provision of social services in Argentina,
IFC has focused on demonstratingthe role that the private sector can play in improving the quality
and delivery of social services,and opportunitiesthat exist for private investors.
IFC approved in 1998 its first health sector project in Latin America -- in a private hospital in
Cordoba. IFC provided $9.6 million to help Hospital Privado de Cordoba finance its $20.4 million
project to expand, renovate and rationalize its operations. The project includes construction of a
new building, upgrading of existing facilities, acquisition of new medical equipment, creation of
satellite health centers and improvement of management information systems. IFC's financing
offered access to long-term financing that is otherwise unavailable to Argentine private health
providers. Success of the project will serve to show other potential investors in Argentina that
private health care projects can be attractive and have developmentalvalue.
In education, IFC approved in 1998its first investment in higher education -- a $22 million loan for
Universidad de Belgrano, one of Argentina's oldest and largest private universities. In 1999, IFC
also approved an investment in Universidad Torcuato Di Tella, another private university. The
Corporation continues to seek opportunities to help the Argentine private sector contribute to
improving social services in Argentina. With the recent establishment of the Social Sectors
Department, IFC is enhancing its capability to support the sectors worldwide. Coupled with
continuing reform in the social sectors, IFC expects opportunities for helping private providers to
continue to expand in Argentina.
27.
Health sector. The Argentine health care system is faced with low efficiency and equity,
lack of control over fast rising health expenditures, and consumer dissatisfaction. Argentina
spends about 10 percent of GDP on health care annually, which is very high by Latin American
standards. As noted in the CAS, health insurance had a number of inefficient and unsustainable
features. The sector is funded through three main mechanisms:
-

The public system, which accounts for 22 percent of all health care expenditures, is
funded from tax revenues and is availableto all Argentineans but is used regularly by
only about 17%of the population;

is estimatedthat lessthan20 percentof entrantsto publicuniversitiesactuallygraduate,andit takes
thosegraduatingstudentsan averageof 8 yearsto completetheirstudies(insteadof the scheduledfive),
inflatingthe costof a graduateto an estimatedlevelof over $50,000.As a result,studentsbeganto lookto
privateuniversitiesfor a bettereducation.
6It

- 10-

AnnexA
-

The social security system, which accounts for about 36 percent of national health
expenditures,is made up of some 300 national and provincial Obras Sociales (OSs);
and

-

The private plans, which, together with direct private payments, accounts for 42
percent of total expenditures,provide higher quality medical care and/or coverage for
more complex medicalproceduresnot availablefrom OSs.

The low efficiency of the system is mainly related to the fact that there are too many small OSs.
In general, OSs suffer from weak managementand excess staff -- problems that are associated
with their traditional political functions and a lack of consumer choice in the sector. The
Government has been taking steps to improve the system. In addition to having allowed people
to switch between OSs, the Government is introducing the principles of consumer choice,
competition, and accountability. Private providers and financiers of health care will face
increased opportunitiesfor their roles in the sector, although they need modernizationof delivery
and managementsystemsto keep up with increasingcompetition.
28.
Private participation in housing finance. Although Argentina has a long history of
residential mortgage lending,the current housing finance market in Argentina is very small. It
has been historically dominated by a public sector institution,Banco Hipotecario. The stock of
residential mortgagesto GDP reached a peak of 11.4 percent in 1956, then fell to as low as 0.7
percent in 1983 and rose back to a little over 4 percent in 1999. This compares to 11 percent in
Mexico, 12 percent in Colombia, 15 percent in Chile, 66 percent in the U.S. and 77 percent in the
U.K. Many Argentineans have had a mortgage in the past but now own their houses without a
mortgage. Since 1991, there have been a number of changes in the mortgage business. The
Convertibility Plan has produced a period of relative economic stability, helping people regain
long-term perspectives for housing and its financing. A new Law and regulations were
introducedfor setting up the regulatory frameworkand establishing certain standardizedterms for
mortgagesto help securitizationand develop a secondary market, and in 1999,Banco Hipotecario
was privatized.
29.
The effects of a developedhousing finance market on growth,job creation, and a broader
sharing of benefits of growth, are significant. IFC has recently approved a project to assist the
creation of a secondary mortgage securities market, which is IFC's first large housing finance
operation. The project is expected to bring major impact: extending the benefits of home
ownership; developing local capital markets; broadening the mortgage market; and providing
stimulus to the economy as a whole. There have been early signs of market development, with
several banks starting to offer 30-year fixed rate mortgages for the first time. The primary
beneficiaries are expected to be Argentine consumers,as many more families, some for the first
time, gain access to long-term funds for the purchaseof a home on terms they can afford.
30.
Remaining Structural Impediments. There remain several major structural
impediments to private sector development. While Argentina has made major progress in
addressing many problems through the first generationof reform during the 1990s, there are still
impediments in infrastructure, labor markets and the judicial system. Improvements in these
areas will have positive impacts on growth (throughlower costs and more efficient delivery) and
sharing of benefits of growth (through increased employment and better access to infrastructure
and social services).
31.
Impediments in infrastructure. As noted earlier, Argentina has made great strides in
the infrastructure sector; however, benefits of the successful privatization program have not yet
been felt by the population as a whole. More specifically,

-11-

AnnexA
-

Reforn is still in the process of taking hold in the Provinces, leaving many in the Provinces
behind in access to basic infrastructure and efficiency gains (particularly less developed
Northern provinces)
Transport and logistics costs still remain high in some areas, affecting competitivenessof the
Argentine private sector, although there has been a major reduction in others.

Provinces lag in infrastructure. The successfulprivatization (i.e. transfer of ownership
32.
of assets) has not yet fully translated into an overall increase in new investments in infrastructure.
Investment in infrastructure(excludingthe Yacyreta project) in the last 10 years has fallen below
2 percent of GDP -- a level many agree is insufficient to support export-led growth. In many
Provinces (in particular in the northernregion), the lack of investment is more acute, because they
not only face fiscal constraints but also lag in introducing reform and private infrastructure
investments. Infrastructure deficits in water and sanitation, roads, inland waterways, and urban
services require attention. Private infrastructurein many areas has brought a significant reduction
in infrastructure costs to business. In transport, however, this is limited to a few areas. For
example, the port costs of soybean transportation declined from $45 per ton to $17 per ton
through private participation. However, there remain a number of areas that require further
improvement, particularly in the Provinces. Hligh transport and logistic costs continue to
constitute a major bottleneckon Argentina'scompetitiveness, especially for export-oriented firms
in inland provinces.
Labor markets. The lack of employment opportunities remains a major issue in
33.
Argentina. There are two major factors for this: (i) slow growth in the middle-market and SME
sectors; and (ii) inflexibility in labor markets. First, as shown in Figure 1, labor productivity in
infrastructure and manufacturinghas significantly increased during the 1990s; however, this has
been achieved in large part by rationalization of workforce. The absorption of a "rationalized"
workforce has not kept up with layoffs,due in part to the lack of growth in the middle-market and
SME segment of the private sector (Figure 6). Second, under Argentina's present labor laws,
labor markets remain rigid, impeding a smooth transition of the workforce to other firms or
sectors. An estimate indicates that the labor rigidity represents about 25% more cost to business,
and promotes informal labor contracts (estimated to cover some 40-50% of the workforce).
Deregulation in the labor markets is critical in improving competitiveness of the private sector
and creating more employment opportunitiesin Argentina,as noted in the CAS.
Figure 6
Employmentin Argentina
13.5
13.0 -~M

W

E 12.5
0

12.0-

- .11'05;
11.0

043MN1

10.5
91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99e

Business costs of an ineffective judicial system. An inefficient and unreliable judicial
34.
process presents a heavy cost to doing business in Argentina. It affects businesses through

- 12 -

Annex A

unpredictability of judicial outcomes, enforceability(the lack thereof) of commercial contracts,
and speed (the lack thereof) in obtaining decisiveresolutions. A survey indicates only 13 percent
of the population in Argentina has confidence in the judicial system, and that the population in
general recognizesthe excessivetime it takes to obtain a decisive resolution. Such inefficiency in
the judicial process poses significant hidden costs to business -- for example, in intermediation
costs (as banks need to cover risks of judicial uncertainty in enforcing contracts within loan
spreads), and in contracted prices (as business has to add a risk premium for the eventual
unenforceabilityof commercialcontracts). Therefore,improvingthe judicial system is critical in
advancingprivate sector developmentin Argentina.
35.
Private sector characteristics mirror development priorities. The four major
dimensions of the Argentine private sector -- the differential access in the corporate sector to
financing,the low level of intermediation(eitherthrough banks or capital markets), the widening
scope for private participation, and structural impediments-- are closely related to opportunities
and obstacles that exist in Argentina in achieving sustained high growth and a more equitable
sharing of benefits of growth and reform. The low domestic credit, nascent capital markets and
low domestic savings hamper growth,particularlyby limiting access of middle-marketfirms and
SMEs to investmentcapital. The differential access to financing amplifies income disparity and
differential access to jobs, as smaller firms employ a majority of the labor force, particularly in
the middle to lower income segments. The new areas for private sector participation require
advancements in reform to realize its potential. The structural impedimentshamper increases in
productivity in the form of high costs of infrastructure, labor, and commercial and legal
transactions. Therefore, the WBG's private sector strategy aims to address these private sector
issues, focusing on: continuing second generation reform and extending it to the Provinces,
helping improve access of the private sector to financing,helping increase the role of the private
sector in new areas; and improving the business environment by removing remaining
impediments.

m.

The World Bank Group's AssistanceStrategy

36.
Focus on cutting-edge activities. Argentina is one of the more developed countries
among WBG clients, in terms of per capita income, advancement of reform, a fairly developed
private sector that accounts for a large part of the economy, and growth potential. Therefore, the
WBG's role naturally comes under disproportionatescrutiny. However, as noted earlier, there
remain major issues of poverty, unemployment and lack of access to basic infrastructure and
social services. The WBG has been instrumentalin helping Argentina introduce reform, and will
continue to help advance the reform program. Macroeconomic stabilization, the first generation
of reform, and the increased private sector role in the economy have made possible a doubling of
the economy during the past 10 years, despite a series of external shocks. A notable aspect of the
WBG's approach in Argentina is its focus on cutting-edgeactivities, which could be, and in many
cases have been, replicated in other WBG member countries. For example, Argentina is a leader
in infrastructure privatization for which IBRD provided policy and technical advice, and IFC
transaction support. Part of this success stems from the fact that Argentina has a relatively
advanced economy, which can supportthe implementationof experimental activities. The WBG
highly values this partnership with Argentina, which could benefit many more of the WBG
members, and will continue to assist Argentina's cutting-edgeprograms for reducing poverty and
achieving equitable, high growth.
37.
Principal objective and priorities. In the area of private sector development, the
WBG's CAS objective of poverty reduction in Argentina is addressed through support for
equitable, sustained high growth and a broad sharing of the benefits of growth. Priority areas for
this objective include:

-

13 -

AnnexA
(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Improving access of the private sector (particularly middle-market firms and
SMEs) to long-term financing for modernization and expansion (as discussed in
paras. 9-21), and enabling firms to ride through major closures in external
financial markets;
Continuing second generation reforms, and extending them to the Provinces,
including in infrastructure(as discussed in paras. 31-32);
Helping increase the role that the private sector plays in sectors previously in the
public sector domain (e.g. social sectors, housing, as discussed in paras. 25-29);
and
Improving the business environment, in particular skills development, labor
markets and the judicial system (as discussed in paras. 22, 33-34).

Comparativeadvantages of WBG institutions. The WBG strategy focuses on these
38.
specific priority areas, where comparative advantages of each institution, or combined strengths
of the Group institutions, could maximize the impact of its activities. In general, IBRD's
comparative advantages lie in its assistanceon macro-stability(along with IMF's), sectoral policy
advice, and capacity building, with appropriate funding instruments. IFC's advantages lie in
specific transactions, in particular catalyzing financing for new and innovative projects in
"frontier" sectors. MIGA plays a catalytic role in reducing investors'country risk perceptions on
the country for areas in which they are less forthcomingwithout MIGA's assistance. Experience
shows that the impact is the largest when policy and technical advice and transaction support
from the Group institutionsare provided together, concurrentlyor sequentially.
The following section outlines the WBG's private sector strategy for supporting
39.
Argentina in achieving equitable, broadly shared, sustainablehigh growth.
Box 4 - IBRD-IFC-MIGACollaborationin Argentina
Joint work of IBRD and IFC has been making a significant impact in the reform process in
Argentina.

IBRD and IFC were involved -- sequentially or concurrently -- in Argentina's

reforrn in infrastructure, the financial sector, provincial development, and the social sectors.
A number of notable examples for sequential involvementare found in infrastructure (see Box
2), and the financial sector. In the financial sector, IBRD's assistance for strengthening the
banking sector was followed by a number of IFC investments in that sector, and IBRD's
assistance in capital market development, particularly pension reform, was also followed by
IFC's investment in a private pension fund. Examples for concurrent involvement are found
in the social sectors and provincial development. IBRD's assistance is on-going in both health
and education sector reform where IFC has already made a few investments in private
providers of social services (see Box 3). In provincial development, IFC and IBRD worked
together on a special initiative supporting economic reform in the Tucuman Province. There,
IBRD's overall assistance program was complemented by IFC's support for a project
preparation facility for Tucuman enterprises and a credit line set up with Banco Roberts for
the northern provinces, includingTucuman. MIGA is in regular consultationwith both IBRD
and IFC. Collaboration has intensified over the past two years. IFC and MIGA have been
working closely on an innovative financial sector project, and have had joint consultations
with representatives of the Argentinean private sector for the preparation of the CAS. IFC has
also directed clients to MIGA on several occasions, notably through their representative office
in Buenos Aires.

-14-

AnnexA
EBRD

40.
Summary. Private sector developmentfor broad-basedand equitable private sector-led
growth forms a core part of the CAS framework for poverty reduction, and of IBRD's strategy.
Foremost, IBRD primarily focuses on economic growth and stability, particularly through
supporting the Government in consolidating macroeconomic reforms, and maintaining the
international financial markets' confidence in Argentine economy. At the same time, IBRD's
strategy focuses on longer-termissues for improvingthe productivityand competitivenessof the
Argentine economy through supporting the Government'sefforts to advance second generation
reform both at the Federal level and in the Provinces. Priorities include macroeconomicstability,
and reforming the framework for private sector development, focusing on public sector
governance(including Provincial governance),infrastructure,labor markets, the judicial system,
and the social sector.
41.
Macro-stability. Growth and macroeconomic stability are clearly the sine qua non of
any effort to improve living conditions, although they are by themselves not sufficient for
reducing poverty in Argentina. Maintainingthe financial markets' confidence,improving access
of the Argentine private sector to financing, and reducing the volatility of the economy's
performance (resulting from its vulnerability to external shocks) are critical to sustainable, high
growth. In this context, IBRD, along with IDB and IMF, has provided the Special Structural
Adjustment Loan (SSAL). The SSAL provides financial assistance required with the tightening
of access to international markets, and supports actions to improve the quality of investment in
human capital, enhance the efficiency of financial markets, and improve the regulatory
environment and the quality of public administration. Furthermore,the Government's efforts in
this area with the introduction of the Fiscal Responsibilities Law will play a core role in
maintaining the financial markets' confidence (thus helping lower external financing costs) and
reducing financing requirements of the public sector (thus improving access of the private sector
to domestic financing at a lower cost). With an increased share of provincial expenditures in the
total public spending in Argentina,' resulting from the fiscal improvementsat the Federal level,
the focus will shift from the Federal level to assisting the Provinces in achieving fiscal stability
and improving public sector governanceand management.
42.
Provincial development. The continuing improvements at the Federal level have
allowed IBRD to enhance its focus on extending the benefits of reform to the Provincial level.
Since the end of the 1980s,IBRD has assisted in the developmentin the Provinces, with financial
and technical assistance, such as the Provincial Development Loans I & II and the Provincial
Reform Loan. IBRD has also assisted in the privatization of 18 provincial banks, reform of
provincial pension systems, and improvementsin public administration,health, and education in
Rio Negro, Tucuman, San Juan and Salta through a series of Provincial Reform Loans tailored for
these individual Provinces. Still, institutional weaknessesare pervasivethroughout the Provincial
governments, and among federal ministries that have been slow in adapting to the increased
decentralization. Improvements in this area are critical for private sector development in the
Provinces, as these Provinces on average receive about three-fourths of their revenues from
essentially untied Federal transfers. This amplifies the lack of accountability for investment
programs in basic infrastructureand social services among government leaders and local voters.
IBRD is continuingwith a series of reform operationsto improve fiscal management,the delivery
of social services, and public administration, in Catamarca, C6rdoba, Buenos Aires Province,
Misiones, Chubut and others. This program is complementedwith a series of ESW on provincial
finance, and social services. Improvements in infrastructureare also a key element in provincial
development, and IBRD focuses on helping deepen the reform in transport and logistics, and
The Provinces'shareof thetotal spendingnowaccountsforabouta halfof publicspendingin Argentina.
- 15 -

AnnexA
water and sanitation, particularly in the Provinces. IBRD's strategy aims at supporting the
Government's efforts to: (i) improve economic productivityby improvingthe quality and costs of
infrastructure services; and (ii) improve access to basic services, particularly for lower income
segments. In transport and logistics, IBRD is focusing on: rehabilitation and maintenance of
Federal and Provincial road networks; integrated urban transport systems; and the regulatory
framework. In water and sanitation, IBRD focuses on: regulatory framework in the Provinces;
private participation in particular in the urban areas; and the designing of a long-term master plan
for resource management. The recently approved Provincial Reform of the Water System project
supports an initial five-year plan for stimulating investments, through private concessions, in
certain Provinces (Catamarca,Posadas) and urban areas.
43.
Labor markets. With the poor twice as likely to be unemployed as the non-poor,
employment is a key issue for reducing poverty. Equally important, under the Convertibility
Plan, factor markets, in particular labor, need to be flexible enough to respond to external shocks
and to enhance productivity and improve competitiveness. Thus, IBRD's assistance in this area
focuses on: (i) helping improve labor market flexibility; and (ii) helping achieve sustainable,
higher growth particularly in the SME sector, which has a significant employment impact. With
institutional rigidities and high non-wage costs of labor, the Argentine labor markets lack
flexibility and adjustment has come at the expense of jobs. Under the SSAL, IBRD, along with
IDB, is assisting the Government'sefforts in increasing labor flexibility to reduce labor costs and
enhance the safety net aspects of current severance and unemployment insurance schemes. For
supporting higher growth and employment in the SME sector, IBRD is focusing on the following
two areas. First, IBRD provided an export promotion loan, for which it will review the
effectiveness of its assistance activities. Second, IBRD is assisting in the development of markets
for financial instruments available for SMEs, such as leasing, through the Capital Market
Development Technical Assistance,and the SSAL.
44.
Judicial system. As noted earlier, a reliable and efficient judicial system is critical for
the development of the Argentine private sector, and is one of the WBG's priorities in the CAS.
Improvements in this area require a long process, as has been the case in other WBG member
countries. IBRD's current focus includes: (i) piloting with the development of model judiciaries;
(ii) providing support for institution building for the Consejo de la Magistratura, improving
national legal registries, and creating a consensus among principal actors about the contents of
reform program; and (iii) support for judicial reform in the Provinces.
45.
Social sector. IBRD's programs in education and health, in relation to private sector
development, are as follows. In education, IBRD has provided a Higher Education Reform
project and secondary education projects, which are intended to improve the quality of public
education, especially at the secondary level. The higher education project is designed to support
the Government to establish a competitive environment for the improvement of higher education
to provide, through a transparent funding mechanism, the appropriate incentives for continuous
educational efficiency gains and quality enhancement. In health, IBRD's primary sector
objectives include improving outcomes for the poor, enhancing performance of services and
improving health care financing, in which the private sector plays an increasing role. IBRD has
assisted the Government in creating a more efficient and equitable health financing system,
including both compulsory social insurance (OSs) and voluntary private health insurance which
together cover about 70 percent of the population. IBRD is also assisting in health reform at the
Provincial level, through provincial reform loans as well as sector loans. Particularly, it aims at
advancing health reform at the Provincial level, and addressing the internal efficiency of public
hospitals by introducing managerial and financial autonomy. As noted earlier, increased
opportunities in these sectors, stemming from increased competition, has broadened the scope for
private participation (see paras. 25-27).

- 16-

AnnexA
IFC

46.
Focus on "frontier." Given Argentine corporates'access to financing (under "normal"
market conditions) and IFC's exposure constraints (see Box 5), high selectivity and a sharper
focus on high impact activities are important aspects of IFC's country assistance strategy for
Argentina (Table 8). IFC is giving priority to activities in "frontier" sectors, which could have a
high impact with demonstration effects and could also be replicated in other countries. IFC's
priority areas -- financial sector (e.g. housing), middle-marketand SMEs, health and education,
and Provincial private infrastructure-- correspond to this 'frontier'-orientation. This strategy is
also based on IFC's positive experiences in supporting the first projects in frontier sectors in
Argentina(see Box 6).
Table 8
IFC Project Approvals
FY95-96 vs. FY99-00 (to date)

FY95-96
# of projects
FinancialServices
7
Transport& Utilities
4
General
Manufacturing
7
and Services
Agribusiness
7
Telecommunications
2
Power
2
Oil & Gas

4

Petrochemicals
Mining

I
I

Total

FY99-00(todate)
#of projects
FinancialServices
5
Transport& Utilities
2
General Manufacturing
5
and Services
Agribusiness
3
Social Services
I

16

35

Box 5 - IFC Country Exposure

IFC's single country exposureconstraints also dictate a sharp focus on activitieswith high impact
and in 'frontier' areas. IFC's exposure in Argentina is currently the largest in terms of net
disbursed portfolio and the second largest in terms of net held portfolio. As at the end of
February 2000, net disbursed portfolio in Argentina amounted to US$1,099 million, accounting
for 11.4 percent of the total IFC portfolio and 17.9 percent of IFC's Net Worth. IFC's current
internal policy guidelines for single-country exposure are 12 percent of net portfolio (held or
disbursed) and 25 percent of Net Worth (disbursed). IFC's country exposurein Argentina is close
to the lower of these two guidelines (the 12 percent guideline) on a disbursed basis, although it is
considerably below the limit on a committed basis, at 9.8 percent of total held portfolio. IFC has
informed the Board that it may temporarilyexceed this guideline,although this is unlikely,and it
is expected that exposure will be under 12 percent by end-FY2000. IFC is also assessing
potential options to create more headroom for Argentina (such as securitization and synthetic
country risk swap). However, IFC's investments in Argentina will continue to be constrainedby
both role and exposure considerations,and added headroom would be principally reserved for
dealing with potential future disruptions in Argentina'saccess to intemational financial markets.
47.
Areas of focus. IFC's strategyis closely aligned with that of the Bank, and is centered on
three themes -- improvingaccess to investment financing for companies that will create growth
and employment,supporting activity which demonstratestangible benefits of growth and reform,
and supporting "frontier" projects which could be replicated in other WBG member countries.
Operationally, this translates into six areas of activities:

- 17-

Annex A

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Help develop domestic financial markets which broaden and deepen intermediation of
investment capital;
Help develop private provision of social services in health and education;
Supportprivate infrastructurein 'frontier" areas and in the poorer Provinces;
Supportcompanies that currently lack access to long-term financing, in particular middlemarket firms and SMEs;and
Help develop innovative "risk enhancement" structured finance that could improve
Argentine firms' access to extemal capital and reduce financing costs; and
Support for the development of potential "growth leader" areas, such as information
technology.

This focus implies that IFC will do much less of certain types of investments. Going
48.
forward, it is expected that oil, gas, petrochemicals, mining, and large infrastructure projects in
power and telecommunications, will play a very limited role. IFC's resources in these sectors
have been re-deployed to other countries.
Box 6 - IFC experiences in frontier investments
In Argentina, IFC has made a number of "frontier" investments, which helped expand the
private sector's role in services that were previously in the public sector domain, and
demonstrated that private sector financing was forthcoming for investments in such frontier
sectors. Many of these investments were subsequentlyreplicated to benefit many other WBG
member countries. Since the early 1990s,IFC has assisted in the privatization of the Buenos
Aires water system, national postal service, ports and railways and invested in two private
universities, all firsts for the Corporation,as well as making investments in the emerging area
of private health care. Some of these projects representedthe first of their kind in the world:
Aguas Argentina, Correo Argentino, and most recently SMMC -- the first major secondary
mortgage market company in Argentina.
Aguas Argentina (Aguas), a large scale private concession for the water and sanitation system
in the Buenos Aires Metropolitan area, was the first of such an attempt in the developing
world, and has become a well-known, leading example of privatization in water and
sanitation. In the mid-1990s, IFC made two investments in Aguas to help finance the
company's five-year capital expenditure program for upgrading and expansion of the system.
IFC provided a total of US$392 million, comprisedof an equity investment of US$7 million,
loans amounting to US$78 million from IFC's account and US$307 million syndicated loans.
The successful financing of Aguas demonstrated opportunities present in privatization of
water systems, and was indeed followed by a number of projects in other countries -privatization in La Paz in Bolivia, Manila in the Philippines, and others.
Correo Argentino (Correo), the Argentine postal services privatized in 1997, was the world's
first privatization of an entire national postal services system. In early 1999,IFC collaborated
with IDB to raise a US$258 million financing package for Correo that should help keep the
Argentine system's expansion on schedule well into the following decade. This financing
came at a difficult time in the financial markets when commercial banks were reluctant to take
new exposures in the emerging markets after the devaluation of the BrazilianReal. IFC and
IDB jointly provided a US$138 million loan from their own account and arranged a total of
US$108 million from commercial banks. IFC also invested US$12 million in equity and
quasi-equity of the company.
A description of SMMC is presented in Box 7.

-18-

AnnexA
49.
Strategy implementation. IFC activity has. been making a strong impact both in
aggregate value and in supportingpriority sectors. During 1997-1999,IFC provided US$1,443
million (including syndications) to the Argentine private sector -- the largest amount among
official sources of finance to the private sector. The distribution of these investments followed
IFC's strategic priorities prior to this CAS: export-oriented industries, financial sector
development, middle-market firms, infrastructure,and social services. During the period, IFC
has also had good experiencesin supportinga number of "frontier"projects(see also Box 6).
Table 9
IFC InvestmentApprovalsin Argentinaby sector
FY 1997-1999,gross
# Projects
|
FoodandAgribusiness
12
FinancialServices
1655
Manufacturing
andServices
9

million
234
337

Infrastructure

4202

SocialServices

1

11

1
38

1,443

Oil and Gas
Total

s

50.
Areas of focus: domestic financial markets. Lack of intermediation to the private
sector is a core issue in Argentina. As noted earlier, the issue is closely associated with the
Government's fiscal requirements and the related levels of interest rates. However, with the
Fiscal ResponsibilitiesLaw in place, this issue could be alleviated in the future, with a reduction
in the absolute level of interest rates. In this context,IFC will continueto help Argentina broaden
and deepen domestic intermediationparticularly through capital markets. Again, an emphasis
will be given to activities which support the currently disadvantaged segment of the private
sector, or which have a broad impact.
51.
While IFC has historically engaged in several operations with the Argentine banking
sector, it is expected that these will become more limited. As most large banks are now under
foreign ownership, IFC assistanceto Argentinebanks would be limited to inducing these banks to
engage in high-impact, under-served areas (e.g. rural finance). IFC's focus will shift to
supporting building non-bank institutions. IFC recently approved a secondary mortgage
securities market project, which is the first large-scale housing finance operation and which will
Box 7 - IFC Housing Finance projects

In October 1999, IFC approved a project to create Argentina's first major secondary
mortgage market company (SMMC),which specializes in asset backed securitization, and
to mobilize complementaryfunding for BancoHipotecario(BH) -- the Argentine mortgage
bank which was privatized in January 1999 -- to originate and warehouse mortgages for
eventual sale to SMMC. With this project, IFC aims at an impact on the Argentine market
similar to Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's on the US market since 1970. IFC would
eventually provide for the purpose of this project up to a total of US$200 million for its
own account and supportthe raising of an additionalUS$1.15billion.
The project will bring best international practices and technology to the mortgage market
in Argentina,and is expectedto: (i) improve the affordabilityof housing and lower the cost
of mortgage loans by making longer term funding available; (ii) develop the Argentine
capital markets by making mortgage backed securities available for domestic institutional
investors, (iii) develop the primary mortgage market by improvingthe efficiency of loan
origination and standardization;and (iv) strengthen the banking sector by enhancing the
liquidity of mortgage loans.
- 19-

AnnexA
have a large impact on the general population (see Box 7). IFC is also helping extend available
maturities from banks for middle-market companies through a liquidity backstop facility, which
enables these companies to finance long-term investment (ALEF). IFC continues to look for
opportunities in leasing, private equity funds and other capital market institutions, which would
support growth in the middle-marketand SME sectors.
52.
Infrastructure. Major infrastructure privatization at the Federal level has been virtually
completed, and IFC expects that there will be little demand for multilateral support at this level.
IFC expects its role in private infrastructure in Argentina to shift to supporting projects at
Provincial or municipal levels. It is much more difficult to obtain private financing for
infrastructure projects at these levels, as they involve sub-sovereignrisks with which intemational
financial markets are often not comfortable. Here again, IFC is focusing on "frontier" projects or
projects with innovative features that could be replicated and IFC's experienceswith which could
be transferred to other countries. Priority also goes to areas where the private sector is attempting
to deliver services previously delivered exclusively through the public sector. Success in these
areas will help address the perception that only a small minority benefits from liberalization and
reform. The prioritiesunder this category include water and sanitation, transport (including urban
transport), and financing structuresthat can address sub-sovereignrisks.
53.
Education and Health. IFC expects to continue to expand its activities in this area in
Argentina. As noted earlier, the development of the social sectors is critical for a broad sharing
of benefits of reforms. As noted earlier, education, in particular, has a major role to play in
providing a firm foundation for potential areas of higher growth, such as information technology
and high value-added activities. IFC has already provided financing for two private universities
and a hospital. In order to enhance its activities in the social sector globally, IFC has recently
created a Social Sector Department. The knowledge and experience that IFC has gained in
Argentina will be transferred to other regions; at the same time, IFC expects to remain active in
Argentina to support transactions in this "frontier"area. Further investments are likely in: private
universities and hospitals, secondary education, vocational schools, and a number of ancillary
services as well. The latter may include, for example: distance learning, medical equipment
leasing, and medical supplies.
54.
Middle-market firms and SMEs. IFC continues to support firms that are too small to
attract foreign capital, are likely to create substantial employment, and are investing to improve or
maintain international competitiveness. Private sector consultations during the CAS preparation
process have also highlighted the role IFC can play in strengtheningthe corporate governance of
middle-market companies. IFC will consider direct financing support for these middle-market
firms, while financing support for the SME sector will more likely take the form of supporting
further development of domestic financial intermediaries,especially the type of institutions (such
as leasing companies) which focus on SMEs.
55.
Information technology. IFC will explore opportunities in supporting another "frontier"
area of growth, information technology. IFC expects to provide support in this area primarily
through support for education. Direct investment support may be provided primarily through
SBEM, an investment vehicle jointly established by Softbank of Japan and IFC, and coinvestment with SBEM.
56.
Credit Enhancement. As noted earlier, today's market conditions have amplified
differential access to extemal financing among borrowers in different risk classes. Even with
borrowers with potential access, financing spreads require much wider differentiation for lower
quality borrowers. This would likely increase demand for guarantees and other risk enhancement
products that could help borrowers gain access, or significantly lower spreads, by helping step up

-

20

-

AnnexA
risk ratings (particularly to an investmentgrade), and would call for a new role for multilateral
institutions, such as IFC and MIGA,in providingsuch risk enhancementservices.
MIGA

57.
MIGA's Activities and Country Exposure. Argentina is the second largest host
country for MIGA insured investments and it accounts for 11.1 percent of MIGA's total Gross
Exposure, and 8.3 percent of its net exposure. MIGA's operationsare highly concentrated in the
financial sector, which account for 75 percent of MlGA's exposurein Argentina. The remaining
25 percent are in infrastructure(2.2 percent), mining (3.6 percent), oil and gas (17 percent), and
services (2.7 percent). Between FY92 and March 31, 2000, MIGA has issued 28 guaranteesfor a
total amount of US$747 million. As of March 31, 2000 MIGA's outstanding portfolio in
Argentina consists of 20 contracts of guarantee with a US$456.8 million Gross Exposure, of
which MIGA's Net Exposure is US$229 million. In addition, MIGA has insured another US$62
million through its CooperativeUnderwriting Program. The total amount of Foreign Direct
Investment facilitatedto date by MIGA in Argentinais close to US$3 billion.
58.
MIGA will be facing capacity constraints in Argentina in the next few years, with only
about US$170 remaining in gross capacity. Taking into consideration its Treaty Reinsurance
Agreement, MIGA's guaranteelimit for Argentinais US$620 million, and its per project limit is
US$200 million. However,through its CooperativeUnderwritingProgram(CUP) and facultative
reinsurance,MIGA could raise substantialadditionalcapacity in the private market.
Box 8 - MIGA's Activitiesin the FinancialSector
MIGA has insured 13 operationsin the financial sector for a total coverageof US$561 million.
Currently, there are ten active contracts. Gross exposure in the financial sector amounts to
US$404 million, including US$45 million under the CUP program: US$270 million is in
general banking, US$90 million in leasing, and US$43 million in mortgage. By insuring
leasing operations MIGA has been able to support both the agribusiness sector and small- and
medium-sized enterprises. MIGA's guarantee for a US$50 million investment by Rabobank
Curacao, N.V. of the Netherlands allowed the establishment of a subsidiary to provide
commercial and financial supportto the food, agribusinessand healthcareindustries. Support is
provided through financial services such as leasing, factoring, and field warehousing, and
commercial services such as purchase and export, to support infrastructure development and
transaction cycles in the agribusinesssector, notably in the oilseeds, dairy, fruit, cotton, leather
and wine industries. The latest guarantee issued in Argentina was for a US$100 million
investment by Citibank to finance long-termleasing of moveableequipment,focusing onSMEs
in the agriculturaland financial sectors.
59.
MIGA's InvestmentMarketingServices. MlGA's investmentmarketing services have
been quite active in Argentina. Local authorities are being assisted in improvingthe framework
for attracting FDI; and more than 80 Argentine organizations use IPAnet, the Investment
Promotion Network. IPAnet harnesses the functionalities and information resources of the
Internet to exchange informationabout investment worldwide. In FY99, MIGA conducted two
workshops on best practice in attracting foreign direct investment, in Mar DelPlata, San Rafael
de Mendoza. The workshop focused on investment strategy, building successful partnerships,
and the tools and techniques required for effective investment promotion. This was the first time
that MIGA provided its investment marketing servicesto sub-nationalentities.
60.
Areas of Priorities. In the next few years MIGA plans to diversify its activities in
Argentina, in order to reduce its exposure in the financial sector. Nonetheless, it plans to

- 21 -

AnnexA
continue activities in the financial sector, given the country's need for financial intermediation,
especially focusing on financial sector operations supporting SMEs and housing finance, and
potentially the health sector by supportingprojects such as medical equipment leasing operations.
MIGA is planning to be active in sectors such as water and sanitation, power, transport,
manufacturing and others in need of foreign direct investment,all this within the context of the
CAS objectives. Investors are expressing interest in MIGA's coverage for investments in the
following sectors: banking, oil and gas, real estate, and infrastructure. In addition, MIGA will
also seek to support Argentinean investments in other developing countries both through its
guarantee program and IPAnet. Investment marketing services will continue their assistance to
the provinces. Given MIGA's own country limitations,high selectivitywill be crucial in order to
maximize its support to meet Argentina'sdevelopmentchallenges.

-22

-

Annex A2 - Page 1 of 2

Argentina at a glance
POVERTYand SOCIAL
Argentina

Latin
America
& Carib.

9/12/00

UppermiddleIncome

Developmentdimond

1999

Population,
mid-year
(millions)

36.6

509

573

GNP per capita (Atlasmethod,US$)

7,600

3,840

4,900

GNP(Atlasmethod,USSbillions)

277.9

1,955

2,811

1.3
2.1

1.6

14

2.5

2.1

Lifeexpectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99

Population
(%)
Laborforce (%)

GNP
per
capita

Moat recent estimate (lateat year available, 1993-99)
Poverty (% of populationbelownabionalpovertyline)

168

Urbanpopulabon
(%of totalpopulation)

90

75

76

Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infant mortality(per 1,000live births)

73
19

70
31

70
27

Childmalnutrition
(%ofchildren
under5)

2

Accessto improvedwater source(¶6of population)
Illiteracy(% of populaton age 15+)
Gross primaryenrollment (% of school-agepopulation)
Male
Female

65s
3
1i1
111

8

7

75
12
113

78
10
109
-

Gross
Primary
nrollment

Accessto safewater
-

Argentina
Upper-middle-income
gmup

--

r

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS

GDP (USSbillons)

Grossdomestic
investmenVGDP
Exportsof goodsandservices/GDP
Grossdomestic
savingstGDP
Grossnatonalsavings/GDP
Currantaccount balance/GDP
Interestpayments/GDP

Totaldebt/GDP
Totaldebtservice/exports
Presentvalue of debt/GDP

1979

1989

1998

1999

69.3
25.9
6.5
26.0
25.2

76.6
15.5
13.1
22.0
13.6

298.1
19.9
10.4
17.4
15.1

282.8
19.1
9.8
17.4
14.8

-0.8

-1.7

Domestc

2.0
85.6
36.4

-4.8
2.4
47.1
52.8
SO.
0.5
410.1

4.3

1.4
30.2
22.7

2.8
51.2
69.6

Savings
c

Presentvalueof debtexports

Economicratios,

Trade

Investment

Indebtedness

197949 1989-99

1998

199

199943

(averageannualgrowth)

GDP
GNPpercapita
Exports
of goodsandservices

-0.4
-2.4

5.0
4.1

3.9
2.4

-3.1
4.1

3.8
29

2.5

8.9

10.1

-1.1

1979

1989

1998

1999

7.8
44.0
32.7

9.6
42.3
30.9

5.7
28.7
19.1

4.6
28.3
18.2

,

io

48.2

48.0

65.6

67.1 '

D

Argentina
Upper-mniddle-income
group

i
,

41

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY

(%of GDP)
Agniculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Pnvate consumption

Pnvateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumplion
Importsofgoodsandservices

63.0
11.0
6.3

73.5
4.5
6.6

197949 19899-9

70.7
11.9
12.9

69.7
12.9
11.5

1998

1999

Growthof investment
andGDP(%)
30
20

N
-i

-6

~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~.1O.4
N
6
20 93

94

_GD

9

-GDP
D

GrowthofexportsandImports(%)

(averageannualgrow)th)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing

0.5

4.0

10.3

-1.

4.6

3.2

-0.9

3.6

1.6

Services

0.5

5.0

3.8

4.7
1Z1

1.3
9.3
19.6

-1.1
6.6
8.4

1.2
-7.6
-11.2

5.4

3.5

-3.3

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption

Grossdomestcinvestment
Importsofgoodsandservices
Grossnational
product

-4.6
-5.4
-1.0

-0.5

TO

-s 1
so
-6.9 1 40
-1.4 30
-4.2 la
10

93

94

99

Exports

*-Imports

97

Note: 1999data are preliminaryestmates.
The diamondsshowfour key indicatorsin the country(in bold) comparedwith its income-groupaverage.If data are missing,the diamondwill
be incomplete

9

Annex A2 - Page 2 of 2

Argentina
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1979

1989

1998

1999

(%change)
Consumerprices
ImplicitGDP deflator
Govemment finance
(% of GDP,includes current grants)
Currentrevenue
Currentbudgetbalance
Overallsurplus/deficit

In1aton(%)
I

Domestic prices

1 207
159.5
147.4

3,066.3
3,057.6

0.9
-2.0

-2.2
-2.2

20
15
1O\

5

8.0
3.7
-1.4

15.5
-3.5
-6.3

18.8
-0.3
-1.4

19.3
-1,5
-1.7

-

93

94

-

9s

9

97

9t

GDPdeflator

t

CPI

TRADE
(US$millions)
Total exports (fob)
Food

Meat

1979
..
.

Manufactures
Total imports(cif)
Food
Fuel and energy

.
..

Capitalgoods

..

1989

1998

1999

9,656
1,016

26,441
3,056

23,315
2,428

716

836

3,186
4,230

17,387
31,404

..

389

1,450

852

15,649

Export and import levels (USS mill.)
35,000

653

25,r000

15,082
25,538
466
6
674

14.000
r

92

80

Importprice index (1995=100)
Termsof trade (1995=100)

92
101

85
94

1999

i

7,000
r l

11,909

Exportpriceindex(1995=100)

_

21,000

__
92

93

94

95

97

96

*Eqxonos

9O

cImports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
1979

1989

1998

8,773
403

6,254
5,505

38,568
-7.445

32,557
-4,799

-6,818

-7,335

-7,847

Currentaccountbalanceto GDP(%)

(USSmillions)
Importsof goodsandservices
Resourcebalance

Netincome
Netcurrent transfers
Cumrentaccount
balance
Financingitems (net)
Changesin net reserves
Memo:
Reservesincludinggold (USSmillions)
Conversionrate (DEC,loca/tUSS)

-973

I

26

8

388

394

-544

-1,305

-14,392

-12,252

'

..
..

107
1,198

10,954
3,438

11,051
1,201

.

.
10,814
2.79E-8 4.23E-2

24,906
1.0

26,407
1.0

j

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
1979

1989

1998

1999

20.942
367

65,618
2,281

140.489
7,417

144,657
8,591

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

2,251
59
0

4.385
417
0

19,690
725
0

23,571
998
0

Compositionof net resourceflows
Officialgrants
Officialcrediors
Private creditors
Foreigndirect investment
Portfolioequity

-2
233
4,334
206
0

54
660
-732
1,028
8

31
2,072
9,527
6,150
50

6
1,538
2,882
11,120
-2,093

96
39
24
15
36
-21

35
316
221
96
196
-101

3,815
2,029
350
1,678
375
1,304

132
1,573
445
1,128
553
575

(USS millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

WorddBank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Prinnpal repayments
Netflows
Interest payments
Net transfers
DevelopmentEconomics

Composition
of 19S6debt(US$mill.)
71t8
5442

731a

91427
A-IBRD
B-IDA
C- IMF

D-Otlermulblatera

E - Bilateral
F-Private
G- Shorterm

i

9/12100

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B2 - Argentina
Selected Indicatorsof Bank PortfolioPerformanceand Management
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa
Average ImplementationPeriod(years)b
Percent of ProblemProjectsby Numbera. C
Percent of ProblemProjectsby Amounta,c
Percent of Projectsat Risk by Numbera,d
Percentof Projectsat Risk by Amount d
DisbursementRatio (%) O
Portfolio Management
CPPRdurng the year (yes/no)
SupervisionResources(total US$ 000)
Average Supervision(US$/project)

1997

1998

1999

2000

34
2.51
5.88
4.75
14.71
14.63
14.45

42
2.58
11.9
14.32
19.05
18.65
20.87

44
2.81
4.55
7.45
6.82
8.76
22.51

39
3.33
12.82
9.29
17.95
12.33
18.06

Yes
4,255
81

Yes
4,753
74

Yes
4,865
77

Yes
4,745
77

MemorandumItem
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
49
14
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
7743.12
2780.47
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
31.3
7.14
% of OED ProjectsRated U or HU by Amt
28.66
3.82

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Reporton PortfolioPerformance(exceptfor current FY).
Average age of projectsin the Bank's countryportfolio.
Percent of projectsrated U or HU on developmentobjectives(DO) and/or implementationprogress (IP).
As definedunder the PortfolioImprovementProgram.
Ratio of disbursementsduringthe year to the undisbursedbalanceof the Bank's portfolioat the
beginning of the year: Investmentprojectsonly.

Annex B3 - Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program
Summary

Argentina

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending
Program a
Fiscalyear Project

2001

BuenosAiresSocialReformBASAL(PRL4)
CordobaProvincial
Reform(PRL5)
BASECONDARY
EDUCII
SantaFe Provincial
Reform(PRL6)
GenderLIL
Education
Result

2002

SocialProtect5 (SYNTySII)

2004

StrategicRewardsb
(H/M/L)

Implementation
b
Risks(H/A/L)

400.0

H

H

300.0

M

M

50.0
150.0

M
M

L
M

5.0
200.0
1,105.0

M
H

L
H

30.0

M

L

175.0
150.0

M
H

150.0
40.0
150.0

H
M
M

H
H
M
M
M

250.0
945.0

M

M

RuralPoverty

75.0

H

M

UrbanPoverty

200.0

H

H

MunicipalReform

300.0

H

H

JudicialReform

50.0

M

M

Sust.Fisheries
2
Result

50.0
675.0

H

M

35.0

H

M

100.0

M
M
M

M
M

UrbanInfrastructure
Integrated
Health
PrivateInfrastructure
Financing
APL2WTRSCTRII
Provincial
Development
III
ProvReform7
Result
2003

USS(M)

Watershed
Pilot
TeacherTraining
APL2WTRSCTRIII
RuralInfrastructure
Result
Total

40.0
100.0
275.0
3,000.0

H

AnnexB3
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Argentina
Argentina- IFC and MIGA Program,FY 1997-2000
1997 1998 1999 2000
IFC approvals(US$m)
Sector (%)
CEMENT & CONSTRUCTION
FINANCIALSERVICES
FOOD & AGRO-BUSINESS
INFRASTRUCTURE
MANUFACTURING
MINING& METALS
MINING & MINERALS
SOCIAL SERVICES
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER
Total
Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

228.10 169.55 347.65 284.0

35
43
4

61
11
9

18
19

13
25
8
33
3
14
1
3

7
79
9

100

100

100

5
100

66.20
2.02
16.44
15.34
100

66
21
12
1
100

66
9
22
3
100

76
19
4
1
100

83.1 340.1

45.0

49.0

Annex B4
Page 1 of I
CAS Annex B4 - Summaryof Nonlending
ServicesProduct
CompletionFY

Argentina
Cost
Audience'
(US$000)

Objective0

Recent completions
Poverty Assessment
Fisheries Study
Labor Markets & Unemployment
Anti-Corruption
Policy Options
Water Resources
Prov Finance
Social ProtectionFramework
Judicial SectorAssessment
Traffic Safety
Competitiveness

FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00
FY00

$332
$133
$70
$125
$73
$207
$18
$120
$35
$95
$100

G,B,P
G,B,P
G,B,P
G,B
G,P
G,B
G,B
G,B
G,B
G,B
G,B

Kg,Pd,Ps
Ps
Pd
Kg,Ps
Ps
Kg,Ps
Kg,Ps
Kg
Kg
Kg
Kg

Underway
MunicipalFinance & Services
Social Sector Institutions
Social Capital
Rural ReproductiveHealth
Coping with Econ Crises

FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01
FY01

$285
$200
$200
$95
$170

G,B
G,B
G,B
G,B,P
G,B

Kg
Kg
Kg
Pd,Ps
Kg

$200

G,B

Kg, Ps

$200
$100
$50
$100
$200
$50
$200
$100
$50
$50
$285
$50
$50
$100
$100

G,B,P
G,B
G,B
G,B,P
G,B
G,B
G,B,P
G,B,P
G,B
G,B
G,B,P
G,B
G,B
G,B,P
G,B

Ps
Kg,Ps
Kg
Pd,Ps
Kg
Kg
Kg,Ps
Kg
Kg
Kg,Ps
Kg,Pd
Kg
Kg
Pd
Kg,Ps

Planned
Transport/InfrastructureAssessment FY01
Evaluationof Food Programsand
Job Retraining
FY01
Non-Formal Education
FY01
ProvincialFinance
FY01
Disaster Insurance
FY01
Rural Infrastructure
FY02
Financial SectorUpdate
FY02
Small and Medium SizeFirms
FY02
Regional Inequalities
FY02
Provincial Finances
FY02
Financial Sector update
FY03
Poverty Assessment
FY03
Mercosur Trade
FY03
Provincial Finance
FY03
Policy Notes
FY04
Competitiveness
FY04
a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation,public debate, problem-solving.

Annex

B5 - Page

Argentina Social Indicators
Latestsingle year

Sameregionlincomegroup
Upper.

1970-75

195045

26.0
1.7
80.7
3.2

30.3
1.5
84.8
3.2

POPULATION
Totalpopulation,
mid-year(millions)
Growthrate(%annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation(%of populatibn)
Totalfertilityrate(birthsper woman)
POVERTY
(%of population)
Nationalheadrountindex
Urbanheadcountindex
Ruralheadcountindex
INCOME
GNPpercapita(US$)
Consumerprce index(1995=100)
Fod priceindex(1995=100)

1993-98
36.1
1.1
89.3
2.6

Latin America&
Caribbean

middleincome

501.7
14
74.5
2.7

5861
1.2
76.6
24

3,860
130

4,870
122

33

33

3.6
7.4

50
7.9

94
95
93

96
97
95

17.6

2,680
0

2,650
0
0

8,030
102
99

1.8

1.5
5.8

4.0
3.5
8.0

96
96
97

96
95
97

100
100
100

55
63

65
71

17

24

Measles

67

98

93

92

DPT

63

85

82

82

INCOMEICONSUMPTION
DISTRIBUTION
Giniindex
Lowestquintile(%of incomeorconsumption)
Highestquintile(% of incomeorconsumption)

4.4
50.3

SOCIALINDICATORS
Publicexpenditure
Health (% of GDP)

Educabon
(%of GNP)
Socialsecurityandwelfare(0A of GDP)
Netprimary school enrollmentrate
(% of agegroup)
Total
Male
Female
Accessto safe water
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

Immunizationrate
(%under12months)

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

Life expectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

2

67
64
71

70
67
74

73
70
77

70
67
73

71
67
74

48
71

32
38

19
22

31
38

26
31

212
116

205
102

163
79

216
116

210
110

Mortality
Infant(perthousandlivebirths)
UnderS (perthousandlivebirths)
Adult (15-49)
Male(per1,000population)
Female(per 1,000population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)

2000WorldDevelopment
IndicatorsCD-ROM,
WorldBank

38

1 of

1

Annex

B6 - Page

Annex B6

Argentina - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product
Agriculture

1995

1996

1997

1998

Estimate
1999

Projected
2001
2002

2000

2003

100.0
5.7

100.0
6.0

100.0
5.6

100.0
5.7

100.0
4.6

100.0
5.0

100.0
5.2

100.0
5.2

100,0
5.2

Industry

28.0

28.4

29.1

28.7

28.3

28.3

29.0

29.0

29.0

Services

66.3

65.6

65 3

65.6

67.1

66.7

65 9

65.9

65.9

Total Consumption
Grossdomesticfixedinvestment
Govemment investment
Privateinvestment
(includes increase in stocks)

82.4
17.9
1.2
16.7

82.5
18.1
1.3
16.8

82.8
194
1.3
181

82.6
19.9
13
186

82.6
19.1
11
17.9

82.2
19.5
1.1
18.4

81 S
20.0
II
189

80.9
204
1.1
193

80.0
20.8
1.1
19.8

Exports(GNFS)b
Imports(GNFS)

9.7
10.1

10.5
11.1

10.6
127

104
12.9

9.8
11.5

114
13.1

12.2
13.7

13.1
144

13.7
14.6

Grossdomesticsavings

17.6

17.5

17.2

17.4

17.4

17.8

18.5

19.1

20.0

Gross national savings'

16.0

15.7

15.3

15.1

14.8

15.2

15.7

16.3

17.1

Memorandum items
Grossdomestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (USS. Atlas method)

258032

272150

292859

298131

282769

292708

310468

328676

347951

7380

7750

8140

8020

7600

7735

7987

8232

8484

5.5
5.5

8 1
8.1

3,9
3.9

-3.0
-3.0

3.0
3.0

45
45

4.3
4.3

4.3
43

Real annual per capita growth rates (%,calculated from 1993 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-4 1
42
6.7
Total consumption
-4.8
4,6
6.5
Private consumption
-5.6
5.3
7.4

26
2.0
2.7

-4.0
-3.4
-4.2

1.7
0.1
1.8

3.5
29
4,1

3.5
2.8
3.0

3.5
2.7
3.3

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated at 1993 prices)
Gross domestic productatmarketprices
-2.8
Gross Domestic Income
-2.8

Balanceof Payments(USS millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

25016
21161
25985
18804
-969
513
-4938

28471
24043
30077
22283
-1606
416
-6468

30940
26431
37241
28554
-6301
436
-12036

31123
26441
38568
29558
-7445
388
-14392

27758
23315
32557
24144
4799
394
-12252

32809
27923
38683
30019
-5874
406
-13520

37004
31775
42336
33411
-5332
424
-13929

41582
36128
46389
37081
-4808
442
-14081

45745
40057
49609
39900
-3864
461
-13724

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Othercapital(ne,incl. crrors& onissions)

2994
-226
1404
-1630
2068

4866
5736
-42
5778
-252

4228
11747
-143
11890
-666

3940
13274
545
12729
616

7294
6347
-113
6460
-187

7000
8500
138
8362
-791

6900
7510
90
7420
843

7700
7564
-1516
9080
288

7921
6592
-669
7261
846

102

-3882

-3273

-3438

-1201

-1189

-1324

-1471

-1636

-0.4

-0.6

-2.2

-2.5

-1.7

-2.0

-1 7

-1.5

-1 I

25.3
23.4
26.8
-11.4

6.4
15 6
-0.1
19.9

13.9
-6.2
21.2
31.3

11.4
10 7
11.2
8.7

-2.6
-23.7
4.3
-17.0

12.0
14.6
11.9
9.0

90
89
90
60

8.7
8.8
8.7
5.7

Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (O of GDP)
Real annual growth rates (1993 prices)
Merchandiseexports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

87
6 1
8.7
57

1 of

2

Annex

B6 - Page

Argentina - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

1995

Public finance(as % of GDP at marketprices)'
19.0
Current revenues
Currentexpenditures
18.8
Current account surplus(+) or deficit(-)
0.2
Capital expenditure
12
Foreign financing
1.7
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2(%)
Private sectorcreditgrowth/
total credit growth (%)
Priceindices( 1993=100)
Merchandiseexportprice index
Merchandiseimport price index
Merchandise termsof trade index
Real exchange rate (USS/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator(% change)

a.
b
c.
d.
e.
f

1996

1997

1998

Estimate
1999

2000

Projected
2001 2002

2003

16.9
17.8
-0.9
1.3
2.3

18.4
18.8
-0 4
13
3.0

18.8
19.1
-0.3
1.3
2.3

19.3
209
-1.5
11
34

19 3
199
-0 6
1.1
3.5

19.1
19.0
0.1
1.1
11

18.8
18.1
07
1.1
0.7

18 8
17.8
1.0
1.1
0.1

20.8
-4.3
-21 7

23.7
200
98.2

27 9
269
106.7

30.4
106
129.6

32.6
18
142.0

32.9
46
91.0

33.2
7.1
1159

33 6
69
117.5

33.6
59
1190

1088
106.9
101.8
48 17

115.9
105.6
109.8
48.23

111.9
103.2
108.4
48.23

100.5
97.9
1027
48 19

870
91.3
95.3
46.18

93 1
98.5
94.5
45.67

972
103 4
94.0
45.20

1016
108.6
93.6
4477

103.7
110.5
93.8
44 33

3.4
3.2

0.2
-0.1

0.5
-0.5

0.9
-2.0

-2.2
-2.2

14
0.5

14
1.5

1.5
1.5

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS"denotes "goods and nonfactor services"
Includesnet unrequited transfersexcluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMFresources.
Consolidated centralgovemment.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in USS/LCUdenotes appreciation.

15
15

2 of

2

Annex

B7 -

Page

Annex B7

Argentina - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debtoutstanding and

1994

Actual
1996

1995

Estimate Projected
1999
2000

1997

1998

109756

124696

140489

144657

2001

2002

2003

148825

157613

166667

175819

85656

98547

13447

12891

11209

14940

15793

4168

4168

8788

9054

9152

5865

12360

15883

19867

19582

23549

27327

33566

33952

33430

342 4
33.2

346.1
36.2

354.7
37.5

400 7
41.8

506.1
49.7

4409
494

402.2
47.9

379.0
48.0

364.3
479

349.2
47.7

30.2

49.4

55.8

64.2

62.9

84,8

83.3

90.7

81.7

731

17.0

15.3
27.6

disbursed (TDO) (USSm)'

Net disbursements(USSm)'
Total debtservice (TDS)
(USSm)W
Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS

16.4

9.3

7.8

5.2

5.7

7.8

9.7

9.2

Preferred creditor DS/public

45.5

32.4

25.6

17.1

18.7

22.7

27.8

25.4

33.4

DS (%)'
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRDTDO(USSm)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
ShareoflBRDportfolio(%)
IDA TDO (USSm)d
IFC(US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c

3.6

2.3

2.1

2.1

4913

5372

5494

3.6

40

44

5.0

5.1

62

7.2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

487.0

788.0

799.0

914.0

880.0

1019.0

391
96

655
133

658
141

628
286

592
288

716
303

129

150

122

169

218

4109

2.3
7188

4.2
8552

4.4
9380

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSrn)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shorttemn capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

4.4
10082

7.3

6.8

9147

8255

7.1

70

70

0

0

0

1 of

1

CASAnnex B8 - Argentina
Status of Bank Group Operations(OperationsPortfolio)
Closed 54
Projects

Board
Date
FiscalDeeomn
Year Active Projects
1987
1991
1993
1993
1995
1995
1995
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1996
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998

P005968
P005977
P006003
P006036
P005992
P006060
P006018
P045687
P034091
P006030
P006057
P038883
P006040
P006055
P037049
P043418
P006059
P039584
P006052
P040808
P046821
P006010
P005980
P050714
P049269
P055935
P055477
P050713
P052590
P006050

DifferenceBetween
ExpectedandActual

LastPSR

SupervisionRating
t~
Obves
Proaress
Ob ectives
Progre-ss
SEGBA V
U
U
WTR SUPPLY II
S
S
RD MAINT & REHABSCT
HS
HS
YACYRETA II
U
U
AR-SECONDARYED I
S
s
MUNIC DEVT II
HS
HS
PROV DEVT II
S
HS
AR-HEALTHINSURANCETA
S
S
AR-HIGHER ED. REFORM
S
S
AR-PROV. HEALTH SECTOR
S
S
AR-SECONDARYED. 2
S
S
ENT.EXPORTDV.
S
S
FORESTRY/DV
S
S
MINING SCTR DEVT
HS
HS
PUB.INV.STRENGTHG
S
S
AR-AIDS AND STD CONTROL
S
S
AR-MATERNAL& CHILD HLTH
S
HS
B.A.URB.TSP
S
S
FLOOD PROTECTION
S
S
N.FOREST/PROTC
S
S
PENSIONTA
U
U
PROVAGDEVTI
S
S
PROV ROADS
S
U
AR-SECONDARYEDUCATION
S
S
AR-SOCIAL PROTECTION3
S
S
EL NINO EMERGENCY
S
S
MINING TA
S
S
MODEL COURTDEV.
U
S
NAT HWY REHAB&MAINT
S
S
POLLUTIONMGT.
S
S

a.Intendeddisbursements
to dateminusactualdisbursements
to dateas projectedat appraisal.

OriginalAmountinUSMillions
IBRD

IDA

276
100
340
0
190
210
225
25
165
101.4
115.5
0
16
30
16
15
100
200
200
19.5
20
125
300
119
284
42
39.5
5
450
18

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Cancel.
0
36
0
0
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Disbursementsal
Undisb.
35.89
9.65
13.76
0
43.67
103.74
103.46
1.36
76.54
55.57
72.93
0
8.57
2.55
7.57
3.5
64.67
145.24
171.82
14.57
8.81
117.29
275.83
40.12
111
35.59
17.56
4.56
311.49
17.7

Orig. FrmRev'd
35.89
45.65
13.27
0
63.67
-34.25
-4.03
1.36
74.54
50.37
57.83
0
1.67
0.16
12.06
1.25
-3.33
55.24
71.83
-1.43
6.37
22.81
143.83
36.57
111
35.59
17.56
3.16
176.24
8.79

0
9.65
0
0
36.51
0
0
0
65.54
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
4.82
0
0
0
0
0
0
6.09
0
0
0
0

>

0

0

CAS Annex B8 - Argentina

Status of Bank Group Operations(OperationsPortfolio)
Closed
Projects

Board
Date
FiscalDeeomn
Year Active Projects
1998
1998
1998
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
1999
2000
2000

P051695
P051694
P006041
P058526
P006058
P057449
P006043
P055461
P062992
P062991
P006046
P063388
P055482

PROV REF II - RIO NEGRO
PROV REF II - SAN JUAN
SMALL FARMERDV.
AR-DRUG PREVENTION(LIL)
AR-SOCIAL PROTECTION4
ARG YEAR 2000
RENEW.ENERGYR.MKTS
SOC&FISC NTL ID SYS
SPEC REPURCHASE
SPECIAL SAL (SSAL)
WATER SCTR RFRM
AR-HEALTHINSURANCEFOR
AR-PUB. HLTH. SURV. & DISE

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
SupervisionRating
mt~
Development Implementation
U
S
S
S
S
U
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S

TOTAL

U
U
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

OriginalAmount in USSMillions
IBRD

IDA

Disbursements

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

75
50
75
4.75
90.75
30.3
30
10
505.05
2525.25
30
4.9
52.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
250
0
0
0

25.0
15
45.21
4.7
76.32
27.45
29.2
7.25
500
500
30
4.9
52.5

75.0
50
17.77
0.83
2.66
5.45
1.5
1.75
0
750
4.5
0.5
1

0
0
9.21
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

7230.4

0

311.5

3192.54

1914.63

131.82

X

00

0
a. Intendeddisbursements
to dateminusactualdisbursements
to dateas projectedatappraisal.

u

Argentina
STATEMENTOF IFCIs
Held and DisbunredPortfoUo
As of March, 2000

Annex

IFC Data Warehouse

B8 - Page

3 of

5

(Amounts In US Dollar Millions)

IFC Held

-

IFC Disbursed-

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

1998

Aceitera Chabas

0.00

0.00

3.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.10

0.00

1994

Aceitera General

8.75

0.00

. 6.90

0.00

8.75

0.00

6.90

0.00

1960/80t95/97199

Acindar

81.25

16.43

10.00

40.44

81.25

16.43

10.00

40.44

1994/95/96

Aguas

56.73

7.00

0.00

137.12

56.73

7.00

0.00

137.12

1977/84/86/88/94/
96
1999

Alpargatas

19.23

6.05

6.37

48.79

19.23

6.05

6.37

48.79

American Plast

10.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

10.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1993

ARG EQUITY INV.

1998

AUTCL

1989/96

0.00

2.84

0.00

0.00

0.00

2.84

0.00

0.00

12.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

6.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Banco Frances

4.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

4.10

0.00

0.00

0.00

1996/99

Banco Galicia

74.00

0.00

0.00

245.00

74.00

0.00

0.00

245.00

1997

Banco Roberts

10.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

10.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1995

Banco Roberts-CL

0.00

0.00

20.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

20.00

0.00

1996

Bansud

3.77

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.77

0.00

0.00

0.00

1994/99

BGN

12.00

0.00

36.00

0.00

12.00

0.00

36.00

0.00

1996

Brahma - ARG

15.64

0.00

0.00

19.80

15.64

0.00

0.00

19.80

1988/93/94

Bunge y Bom

1.06

0.00

0.00

8.02

1.06

0.00

0.00

8.02

1989/96

CAPSA

9.82

0.00

5.00

27.00

9.82

0.00

5.00

27.00

1999

CCI

0.00

20.00

20.00

0.00

0.00

20.00

6.00

0.00

i 995

CEPA

6.67

0.00

3.00

1.20

6.67

0.00

3.00

1.20

1999

Correo Argentino

63.00

0.00

12.00

0.00

63.00

0.00

12.00

0.00

1994

EDENOR

9.75

0.00

15.00

10.00

9.75

0.00

15.00

10.00

1998

F.V. S.A.

12.00

0.00

4.00

0.00

12.00

0.00

4.00

0.00

1998

FAID

0.00

2.75

0.00

0.00

0.00

2.75

0.00

0.00

2000

FAPLAC

10.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

10.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

1992/93

FEPSA

3.30

0.00

2.00

1.47

3.30

0.00

2.00

1.47

1997

FRIAR

10.00

0.00

2.50

7.00

10.00

0.00

2.50

7.00

1996

Grunbaum

1997

Guipeba

1998

6.00

0.00

2.00

3.33

6.00

0.00

2.00

3.33

15.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

15.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

Hospital Privado

9.60

0.00

0.00

0.00

6.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

1992

Huantraico

0.00

27.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1995/97

Kleppe/Caldero

10.21

0.00

0.00

0.00

10.21

0.00

0.00

0.00

1992193/96

Malteria Pampa

8.79

0.00

1.00

5.13

8.79

0.00

1.00

5.13

1996

MBA

0.00

0.16

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.16

0.00

0.00

1997/00

Milkaut

7.50

5.03

10.00

3.00

7.50

2.79

10.00

3.00

1978/81/86/87/91/
93/96/99/00
1993/94

Minetti

47.50

0.00

14.00

119.09

47.50

0.00

14.00

119.09

0.00

5.55

0.00

0.00

0.00

5.55

0.00

0.00

1995

Nahuelsat

17.50

5.00

0.00

0.00

17.50

5.00

0.00

0.00

Molinos

Note: Vahesdonot refledoff-baace heetitenw
hm JSchas guma
LastDatUpdate:March31,2000

andrisknungmnu pro&Ida.
RunDate:May01,2000

Page:Iof 3

Argentina
STATEMENT OF IFC's
Held and Disbured Portfolio

IFC Data Warehoue

Annex

Asof March,2000
IFC Held

B8 - Page

4 of

(Amounts In US Dollar Millions)
IFC Disbured

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

1996/99

Neuquen Basin

0.00

31.40

0.00

0.00

0.00

18.36

0.00

0.00

1993

Nuevo Central

3.75

3.00

0.00

5.00

3.75

3.00

0.00

5.00

1992

Oleaginosa Oeste

2.29

0.00

3.75

0.92

2.29

0.00

3.75

0.92

1992/95

PAE - Argentine

20.16

0.00

0.00

24.61

20.16

0.00

0.00

24.61

1998

Patagonia

5.00

0.00

1.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

1.00

0.00

1998

Patagonia Fund

0.00

24.97

0.00

0.00

0.00

7.08

0.00

0.00

1990/94

Petroken

19.39

0.00

5.00

3.65

19.39

0.00

5.00

3.65

1994

Quilmes

7.93

0.00

0.00

3.75

7.93

0.00

0.00

3.75

1996

Refisan

14.55

0.00

0.00

18.00

14.55

0.00

0.00

18.00

1992

Rioplatense

5.33

1.00

0.00

1.67

5.33

1.00

0.00

1.67

1999

S.A. San Miguel

11.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

11.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

1995

SanCor

13.75

0.00

20.00

12.00

13.75

0.00

20.00

12.00

1996

SIDECO

0.00

15.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

15.00

0.00

0.00

1995

Socma

12.51

0.00

0.00

30.00

12.51

0.00

0.00

30.00

1997/98/99

Suquia

35.00

0.00

10.00

25.00

35.00

0.00

10.00

25.00

1997

T61

10.00

0.00

5.00

26.25

10.00

0.00

5.00

26.25

1987/89/90/96/97

Terminal 6

16.56

0.00

0.00

14.62

16.56

0.00

0.00

14.62

1995

Terminales Port.

8.50

2.00

0.00

0.00

8.50

2.00

0.00

0.00

1995

Tower Fund

0.00

15.73

0.00

0.00

0.00

14.07

0.00

0.00

1995

Tower Fund Mgr

0.00

0.14

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.13

0.00

0.00

1994/96/97

Transconor

24.46

0.00

19.08

187.18

24.46

0.00

19.08

187.18

1998

U.Belgrano

7.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.7,

1997

Vicentin

22.19

0.00

0.00

7.00

22.19

0.00

0.00

7.00

1993

Yacylec

5.50

5.04

0.00

6.09

5.50

5.04

0.00

6.09

1996

Zanon

11.67

0.00

6.00

0.00

11.67

0.00

6.00

0.00

Total Portfolio:

811.77

196.09

252.70 1,042.14

| Approvals Pendin
FY Approval

Project Name

2000

ALEF

1999

American Plast

2000

Argentina SMMC

1999

Biopork

2000

Cefas

1999

Equity

Quasi

Partic

25.00

0.00

0.00

150.00

0.00

0.35

0.00

0.00

100.00

50.00

0.00

450.00

5.20

0.00

2.00

5.00

10.00

0.00

5.00

0.00

Dl TELLA

9.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

1999

Galicia BLINC

0.00

0.00

0.00

75.00

2000

Hipotecario USCP

50.00

0.00

0.00

250.00

1998

U.Belgrano

15.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Note: Values do not reflea off-blance shed item sch as guarantee and risk mgement

LAstDataUpdate: March31, 2000

795.67

134.26

238.70 1,042.14

Commitment

Loan

producta

Run Date: May01.2000

5

Pagc:2of3

Argentina
STATEMENT OF IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of March, 2000

IFC Data Warehouse

Annex

B8 - Page

5 of

5

(AmountsIn US DollarMillions)
Approvals Pendina Commitment

FY Approval

Project Name

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

1999

Unisoy

5.00

0.00

2.00

4.00

219.20

50.35

9.00

Total Pending:

Note: Values do not refled off4blance shed items such as guaate
Last Data Update: March 31, 2000

934.00

and risk mnmagent produos.
Run Date: May 01,2000

Page:3of 3

Annex B9

ArgentinaCAS Program Matrix (FY2001-FY2004)
The program has three pillars: (i) enhancing social development, including poverty alleviation and human resource development;(ii) improving the
performance and institutional capacity of government, particularlysub-national governments,to deliver key, social, infrastructure,and environmental
services; and (iii) consolidating structural reforrns, including public financc, labor markets and the financial sector to ensure successful implementation of
the assistance program and enhance governancethiroughinistitutionbuilding.
1. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Strengthen social policy coordination and the delivery of social assistanceduring the adjustment period. Support transition to more flexible labor markets to reduce poverty. Rebuild the institutional basis for
improvements in human resourcedevelopment to improve social welfare and the productivity of the work force.
Instruments
Self-Evaluation Indicators
Country Performance
Strategy/Actions
Diagnosis
Indicators
Major Related Activities of
World Bank Group
Other Donors

overty

Although the level of social
spending is high relative to
comparator countries, social
indicators lag and economic
recessionshave exposed weak
social assistancedelivery to address
structural and transitional poverty.
In particular, rural poverty has
received little attention.

Improve poverty analysis, monitoring
and targeting of social assistance.
Ensure adequatefunding of safety net
programs and improve efficiency in
social spending.

Target delivery of basic maternal and
child health scrvices to the poorest
families.

Social assistancespending
levels protected in cyclical
downturns, and reoriented
toward effective/targeted
safety net programs.

ISLC Prograrn/SYNTyS
Il/SIEMPRO have equipped
Gov't for more effective
poverty monitoring and
targeting.
National Unified Registry of
beneficiaries adopted
Coverage of identified
vulnerable groups increased

Matemal mortality rate
reduced to 12 per 1,000
births nationally, with larger
percentagedecreasesin poor
provinces. Matemal and
child care integrated into
basic health service package

Focused maternal child
programs operating in the
poorest provinces

AAA
Rural Poverty (97)
Regional ISLC /Social
Program IDF Grants (98)
Gender Review (99/00)
Poverty Assessment(00)
Soc. Prot. Framework (00)
Social Capital (01)
Rural Prod Health (01)
Cooping with Crisis (01)
Eval. Food/Training Programs
(01)
Partnership Program for
Poverty Reduction (00+)
Small Grants Program for
Social Innovation (00+)
SMEs (01)
Update of Poverty Assessment

IDB engaged in sites and
services activities in poor
urban areas.

(03)

CD

0
(5

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

Counlry Performance
Indicators

Self-EvaluationIndicators

Instruments
World Bank Group

Ensurethat thepooresthouseholdsare Nationalstrategyfor attaining
coveredby thehealthinsurance
universalparticipationin
systemandotherpartsof thesocial
healthinsuranceagreed.
securitysystem.

Programssupporting
developmcnt
of Insurance
for the Uninsuredin 25%of
theprovinces.

Increasefocusonrural povertyand
indigenousgroups. Increasefocuson
basicservicesfor thepoor, including
actionsto strengthentheir social
capitaland accessto basicservices.

Community-based
projects
operatingin rural andpoor
urbanareas.Ruralpoverty
strategydesignedand
implementedstartedin pilot
areas.

Increased
numberof poor
familiesin ruralareasserved
by infrastructureandsocial
services.

Nationalhousingstrategy
devised,with commensurate
changesin FONAVI
Developmentmechanisms
for moreintegratedsocial
servicedeliveryto thepoor

Major Related Activities of
Other Donors

ProiectFinancilg
Seriesof ProvncialReform
FamilyCap.Building Lola(01
IntegratedIlealth (01)
Soc.Protection
V/SyNTIS 11
RuralPoverty(02)
uran Poverty(02)
Supervision
S _erisoPrvisincilRfr
SeLesof ProvincialReform
Loans
SSAL(98)
SmallFarmerDevt. (98)

supportfor innovativesocial SRNeal Energy(99)
programsandpartnerships Soc.eProtectinergy
(98)
Soc.ProtectionIV (99)
Drug PreventionLIL (99)
Insurance
for the Poor(00)
IndigenousPeoplesLIL (00)

s

(D

up
(D
to

a

2

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

CountryPerformance
Indicators

Indicators
Self-Evaluation

Instruments
World Bank Group

Major Related Activities of
Other Donors

Education

Educationsystemhasdeteriorated,
threateningthe futurebasisfor
and
improvedcompetitiveness
incomedistribution.

Assistthe provincesto improvethe
leamingoutcomesof secondary
schoolstudentsthroughenhanced
resourceallocation,panlicularlyfor
studentsfrompoorfamilies. Redirect
publicspendingin highereducationto
reachthe poor. Supportprivate
participation.

Increasesecondary
graduationratefrom 53%to
70%.
Decreasein repetitionrates
anddesertionratesfor poor
secondarystudents
education
Compensatory
programsreachingmorethan
25%of poorschools
Educationattainment
increasedproponionately
morein poorprovinces

Successfulimplementation
of Bankprogramsupporting
theFederalEducation
Reformandtargetedefforts
to poorstudentsin
secondaryschools.
New approachto school
level budgetingpiloted in at
leastoneprovince
SchoolAutonomypiloted in
at leastoneprovince
Pilot programof full-day
schoolingin poorareasof
BuenosAires Province
replicatedin someother
provinces.
Continuingdialogueon
highereducationreformand
educationaltematives

AAA
Prov.SocialServices(97)
EducationReview(99)
PovertyAssessment
(BackgroundPaper)(00)
of Social
CapacityAssessment
Institutions(01)
Non-FormalEducation(01)
Supervision
SecondaryEd.1,11,Ill
Higher Education(96)
PRL2(97)
SSAL(98)
ProjectFinancing
Education(01)
BASAL(01)
CordobaPRL(01)
PRL(00)
Catamarca
SantaFe PRL(01)
PRL 6 (02)
IFC supportfor privatehigher
education

IDB dealingwith primary and
vocationaleducation,
scholarshipsfor poorfamilies.

W

l
00
w

0

3

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

Country Performance
Indicators

Self-EvaluationIndicators

Instruments
World Bank Group

HlealthServices
Argentinaspendsat OECD levels
but receivespoorhealthservices
dueto monopoliesin health
insurancefinancing.Too little
spendingfor healthpromotion,
particularlyfor diseases
affecting
the poor.,responsible
parenthood
andtraffic safety Publichospitals
lack accountability,subsidizenonpoor andareoverburdened
by
clientsseekingprimarylevel
attention.

Increasecompetitionin thehealth
insurancemarket,andreformof obras
provincialesandPAMI. Allocate
greaterspendingfor public health
servicesand healthpromotion
programs.

Improveefficiencyand targetingof
publichospitalservicesin the
provincesby decentralizing
decisionmaking.

Marketfully openedto
includenationaland
provincialHMOs andprivate
healthinsurance.PAMI with
sustainablefinancing.
Increasedspendingin
promotionalprograms.

Major Related Activities of
Other Donors

ProvinciallIMOs reformed
andincreasedspendingfor
publichealthservicesin at
least25%of theprovinces.

AAA
IBD activeat primary care
ProvincialSocialServices(97) level.
Traffic Safety(00)
HealthStrategy(informal)(00)
PovertyAssessment
(Backgroundpaper)(00)
CapacityAssessment
of Social
Institutions(01)
ProjectFinancing
Decentralizedpublichospitals Programseffectively
BASAL(01)
linkedto primarycare
supportinghospital
CordobaPRL(01)
networks
decentralization
in one-third Catamarca
PRL(00)
of theprovinces.
SantaFePRL(01)
PRL 6 (02)
IntegratedHealth(02)
IFC financingof privatehealth
services.
Supervsion
PRL2 (97)
SSAL (98)
Prov.Hlealth(95)
HealthInsuranceTA (96
AIDS Prevention(97)
HealthSurveillance(00)
HealthInsurancefor Uninsured
LIL (00)

D

x

to

04

Annex B9

Water andSanitation
Limitedaccessto safewater(65%
coveragecomparedto 87%in
comparatorcountries)andsewage
services,particularlyamongthe
poor,increases
theincidenceof
waterbornediseases.

Increaseinvestmentto improve
serviceand increasecoverageof the
poorthroughprivatesector
participation.

Increaseaccessto safewater
to at least87%.

Supportfor concessioningin
theprovincesthat inclide
programsto facilitateaccess
by thepoor.

AAA
ReformingProvincialUtilities
(96)
New RegulatoryChallenges
(97)
WaterResourceMgt (00)
ProjectFinancing
WaterSectorAPL (00-02)
IFC supportfor private
concessions
Supervision
WaterSupply11(91)

IDB supportfor small
municipalsystems.

2.
PROVINCIAL REFORM AND DEVELOPMENT
Provinces, which are responsiblefor over 80%of spendingin education and health haveyet to undergorequiredfiscaladjustments.Followingprocessofprivatization and decentralization,
provincial
government increasingly responsiblefor providing infrastructure. Small and medium sizedfirms in the provinces needtotake advantage ofopen economy.
Diagnosis
Strategy/Actions
CountryPerformance
Self-Evaluation
Indicators
Instruments
Indicators

l

World BankGroup
__

Major Related Activities of
Other Donors
l

(D

x
rD

on

0

5

-

Annex B9

FiscalReform/SocialSector
Spending
Publicexpendituresin most
provincesshouldbesufficientto
providefor healthandeducation,
but spendingis inefficientand
serviceof poorquality. Procyclicaltransfersand poor fiscal
management
fomentfinancial
crisesandsocialand political
turmoil.

Infrastructure
Argentinalagsbehindmost highincomedevelopingcountiesin the
quantityandquality of
infrastructureservices,particularly
in theprovinces,increasing
businessandlogistic costs.

AAA
IDB co-financingof Cordoba
UnderPRLoperations
ProvincialFiscalUpdate(00PRL.
improvedtax collectionand 04)
structureof spending,with
Fed.ProvincialTaxes(00)
greatertargetingof thepoor. MunicipalFinancesand
Facilitatereformof revenue Services(01)
sharingandtransitionto
ProjectFinancing
newsystem.
Catamarca
PRL(00)
ProvincialDevelopmentTil
(01)
BASAL (01)
CordobaPRL(0lI)
Selected
provincialnetwork: Supportto Gov't in
SantaFePRL(0O)
rehabilitate5,500km;
attractingprivatefinancing PRL 6(02)
upgradeandnew construction for infrastructure,and
IFCfinancingof private
of 3,200km. Expand
promoteprivatesector
infrastructure
electricitycoverageto about participationin maintenance Supervision
30,000new ruralcustomers activities.
PRL2(97)
by 2002.
SSAI. (98)
ProvincialDevelopment11(95)
AAA
TransportAssessment
(01)
DisasterInsurance(01)
Rural Infrastructure
(02)

Deepenfirst generationfiscalreforms Zero aggregate
provincial
with focusonsocialspending.
deficit by 2003. New coIncreaselocalresourcemobilization
participationregimein place.
and improveincentivesunderrevenue
sharing.

Rebuildandupgradeinfrastructure
base. Enhancelocal level public
infrastructureandpromoteprivate
sectorinvestmentin powerand
transport.

W

0

6

-

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

Country Performance
Indicators

Instruments

Self-EvaluationIndicators
World Bank Group

Major Related Activities of
Other Donors

28%of the poorlive in flood-prone Createprovincialcapacityto dealwith
areasandperiodicflooding causes recurrentflooding,protectmost
and developdisaster
majoreconomiclosses,
importantassets,
insurancemechanism.

Systemto dealwith recurrent Provideanalyticalsupport
floodsin placefor Parana
for development
of disaster
Basin,majorurbancenters
insurance.
protected,poor relocatedand
insurancesystemin place.
Transferlessonsof housing
programunder Flooding
projectto moregeneral
housingpolicies

ProjectFinancing
PrivateFinancingof
Infrastructure(01)
UrbanInfrastructure(02)
RuralInfrastructure(02)
Suerisionl
RoadMaintenance(93)
MunicipalDev. 11(95)
ProvincialRoads(97)
FloodProtection(97)
BA UrbanTransport(97)
NationalHighwayRehab(98)
El Nino Emergency(98)
SSAL (98)

IDB financingfor urbandev. in
largecities; exportcorridors
andports;and, provincial
regulatoryreform.

t_4
aq

00

7

Annex B9

3. StUST'AINABLE
GROWTH
Economyremainsvulnerableto externalshocks.Retirn to a sustainableand strongpatternof growthrequirescontinuityof reformsinfactor marketsandfiscalpruidence.Lagsin effectivelymanagingserious
pollutionproblemsneedto beaddressed
givencivil society'sgrowingdemandformeasures
to promoteenvironmentally
sustainable
environment
andpotentiallossesin exportcompetitiveness
as global markets
increasinglyrequireenvironmental
performancebenchmarks.
Diagnosis
Strategy/Actions
CountryPerformance
Self-Evaluation
Indicators
Instruments
Indicators

World BankGroup
Economic
Policy/Governance
Continuingfiscal deficitsincrease
countryrisksandvulnerabilityof
externalshocks. Confidencealso
weakenedby poorpublic sector
efficiencyandtransparency
and
weakjudiciary. Needto resist
protectionistpressures

Reducethestructuraldeficitby reform Attain investmentgradestatus
of thestateat nationalandprovincial
for governmentpaper.
levels,increaseformalityand reduce IncreaseX/GDP.
tax evasion.Continuewith trade
reforn effort

Labor Markets
Laborcostandmarketrigidity
underminesproductivity
improvements
andcontributesto
high unemployment.Significant
partsof economyoperatein black.

Promotetheliberalizationof labor
marketsandreducelabortaxes.

Collectivebargaining
decentralized
and severance
programinitiated.
Unemploymentin single
digits

Major RelatedActivitiesof
Other Donors

AAA

ProvideAAA supportfor
IntroducingCivic Education
Fundprogramandpossible intoSchoolsIDF Grant(97)
emergencyfinancing.
FinancialSector(98)
Operationsto supportstate
Fed.FinancialManagement
modemization,
publicethics Review(98)
andjudiciary.
Policy Options(00)
Labor Market(00)
Anti-CorruptionIDF (00)
JudicialAssessment
(00)
Competitiveness
(00)
Anti-CorruptionStrategy(00)
ProvideAAA for continuing TransportAssessment
(01)
reforms,especiallyfor
CountryProcurement
integrationof informal
Assessment
(01)
sectorinto socialsecurity
SMEs(01)
andhealthsystems,
andto
FinancialSectorupdate(02/03)
reduceevasion
MERCOSUR/Trade
(03)
Competitiveness
(03)

IMF monitoring, IDB lending
in supportof publicsector
modernizationandpersonal
securityissues.

Policy Notes (04)

(D
0o

8

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

CountryPerformance
Indicators

Instruments

Indicators
Self-Evaluation
World Bank Group

Niajor Related Activities of
Other Donors

Sector
Financial/Private
Development
Financialsystem hasreducedits
vulnerabilityto extemalshocksbut
intermediationis weak,with
domesticcreditat only 25% of
GDP.

Reducecrowdingout by improving
increase
fiscalperformance,
competitionby reducingthe role of
public banksand broadenand deepen
capitalmarkets.

Increaselevel of creditto
privatesectorrelativeto GDP
anddepthof capitalmarketin
line with otherupper-middle
incomeeconomies.

Supportongoing
privatizationof provincial
banksthroughPRLs.
ContinueBanktlFCAAA
supportfor broadencapital
markets.

in the
Smallandmediumsizedfirmn
provinces(SMEs)lackaccessto
intemationalcapital,technology
and marketslag behindlargerfirms
of tradeand
in takingadvantage
economicliberalization.

Supportdevelopmentof instruments
improve
to acceleratecreditaccess,
projectformulationandexport
strategiesby SMEs.

SME exportsand
Increased
of SMEsto banking/
access
credit system

IFC focuson
Expanded
SMEfinancingin the
provinces

IDB supportfor restructuring
ProjectFinancing
and of SMEs.
PublicSectorManagement
(ex-Y2K)(00)
Performance
JudicialReform(03)
IFCoperationsin domestic
financialmarkets(incl. Support
for SMEs).
IFC financingof middlemarketfirms.
IFC supportfor credit
structured
enhancement
finance,andinformation
technology.
Supervision
PublicSectorInvestment
(96)
Strengthening
PensionTA (97)
SyNTIS (99)
SSAL/REPO(99)
ModelCourt Pilot (99)
IFC operationsin capital
markets and credit. Lines for
SMEs.

(D

o

9

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

Country Performance
Indicators

Self-EvaluationIndicators

Instruments
World BankGroup
World
GroupOther
Bank

Niajor RelatedActivitiesof
Donors

ReducePollution
Increased
growthandurbanization Coordinatemanagement
at national
havenotbeenmatchedby
andsubnationallevels,andstrengthen
establishment
of anenvironmental regulatoryanalysisand participatory
frameworkwith clearjurisdictions processes.
andenforcement,
nor effective
toolsto promoteresponsible
environmentalbehavior,
particularlyin industry.

Pollutionabatementtargets
andcomplianceschedule
agreedbetweenpollutersand
govemmentin two or three
pollutedareas;incorporation
of cost-effectiveness
analysis
andmonitoringframework.

Pilot integratedpollution
management
approach
introducedat municipal
level. Increased
useof
publichearingsunderBank
operations.

Meetingcommitmentsunder
global environmental
agreements.

Completionof Montreal
Protocolwith adoptionof
localregulations.
Continuedbuildingof GEF
pipeline,including
preparationof GEF-for
biodiversityconservation,
globalwarmingand
intemationalwaters
objectives.

AAA
PollutionStudy(96)
NtunicipalEnvironmentalMgt.
IDF Grant
WaterResources
Mgt (00)
HazardWasteMgt (00)
BA City Flooding(00)
BA Air Quality(00)
MunicipalFinancesand
Services(01)
ProjectFinancing
GEF-Coastal
Contamination
(01)
MunicipalReform(02)
UraniumDecontam.(04)
Supervision
MunicipalDevelopment11(95)
Mining TA 1(95) and 11(98)
MP-Reductionof OzoneDepletingSubstances
(96)
BA UrbanTransport(97)
Pollution Mgt.(98)
GEF-ClimateChange
Mitigation/Overlay(99)

IDB supportingspecificsite
clean-ups,petroleum
environmentalmitigation,and
institutionaldevelopmentof
the FederalEnvironment
Secretariat.UNDP-Phase
11of
theGEF Projecton Patagonia
CoastalZone Management
Plan. OAS initiativefor
GuaraniAquifer.

10

00

10

Annex B9

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

Country Performance
Indicators

Self-EvaluationIndicators

Instruments
World Bank Group

Najor Related Activities of
Other Donors

ConserveNatural Resources
Increased
privateinvestmentin
naturalresourcedevelopment
requiresclearregulatory
frameworkandstrengthened
public
sector oversightcapabilities

Promotesustainable
management
of
naturalresources
and protectionof
biodiversityby redefiningand
modemizingrole of the publicsector.

approachto
Comprehensive
naturalresourcemanagement
developedat nationallevel,
with effectivemanagement
programsin forestry,mining,
water,andfisheries

Provideexamplesof how to
addresscritical natural
resourcemanagement
in a
varietyof sectors,keeping
abreastof thecountry's
emergingnaturalresource
issues,mostnotably,
fisheries,protectionof
sensitiveareasin Patagonia,
etc. Addingthe poorer
Andeanto theareasin
which we areactiveon
promotingconservation.
Agreementon a long-term
agendafor watershed
management
and at lastone
pilot
Increased
confidencein the
Bank'ssupervisionof the
Yacyretaproject.

AAA
ForestSectorReview(94)
Rural Poverty(98)
Environ. Impact(98)
Fisheries(98)
WaterResources
Note(99)
WaterSectorMgt (00)
ProjectFinancing
FisheriesGEF (01)
IndigenousBio-diversityGEF
(01)
DeserficationGEF (02)
SmallFarmersGEF (02)
FisheriesMgt 11(03)
WatershedPilot (03)
Supervision
Yacyreta/SEBGA
(93)
(96)
ForestryDevelopment
Mining TA 1(95) and11(99)
Native Forests(97)
ProvincialAgriculture(97)
SmallFarmers(97)
Bio-diversityGEF (98)
IndigenousPeoples(00)
FisheriesMgt LIL (00)

IDB activein rehabilitationof
irrigation system.

tD

x

1W

00

0

Annex BIO
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex BIO - Argentina
CAS Summary of DevelopmentPriorities
Country
Network area

Major issueb

performance'

Country
pnontyc

Bank

Reconciliation

pnontyc of country and

Bank

pnontiesd

PovertyReduction
& Economic
Management

Povertyreduction
Economicpolicy
Publicsector
Gender
HumanDevelopment
Department
Education
Health,nutrition& population
Socialprotection

Poor
Good
Fair
Good

Unemployment,
safetynet
High
Vulnerability
to shocks
High
Govemance,
sub-national
reformsHigh
Health/Poverty
Low

High
High
High
Moderate Ongoingdialogue

Poor
Fair
Fair

Efficiency/quality
Coverage/effectiveness
Coverage/effectiveness

High
High
High

High
High
High

Fair
Fair
Fair

Ruralpoverty
Jurisdictional/institutional
CivilSociety

Low
High
Ongoingdialogue
Moderate Moderate
ModerateModerate IDB

Capitalmarkets
SMEs/Corporate
govemance
Distribution/environment
Financing/regulation

High
High
High
High
ModerateModerate
High
High

Environmentally
& Socially

Sustainable
Development
Ruraldevelopment
Environment
Socialdevelopment

Finance,PrivateSector& Infrastructure
Financialsector
Good
Privatesector
Good
Energy& mining
Excellent
Infrastructure
Fair

a. Use'excellent,' 'good.' 'fair,' or 'poor.'

b. Indicate
principal
country-specific
problems
(e.g.,forpoverty
reduction,
'ruralpoverty;'
foreducation,
"feniale
secondary
completion;br environment,
'urbanairpollution").
c.Toindicatepriority,use'low,' moderate,"or 'high.'
d.Giveexplanation,
If priorities
donotagree;forexample,
another
MDBmayhavetheleadontheissue,ortheremaybeongoing
dialogue.

Templatecreatedon 51/100

MAP SECTION

IBRD29348

J20
70'

\

/

°*o<
'u0Son~Ivjodor

X

,

-9

PosodACC)
orrientes

~

.<13C°, mrESTERO
__
_C'
~~iJ>, LoRi'0
SAN,
-,
I O J A\'
~

r

/A--

S AN \,

I

JUAN

( 0 SonJAs,

mendozo

1

-

Sn

C6rda
0
oC
RDOBAI
O

0

3A

F3onto
Fe ®Fron6

Sno--

r

'

?
URUGUAY

/

Buenos Aires

r

fMENDOZA:

BUENCOS

Santa Rosa0

AIRES

LA

-1.

NE

/

R

LUIS

-

0•

/

\ SAN/-

r

es

rie

DE

m~.
0 C~iorco

-'.-f

,,t,

,

BRA Z I L

o

_,Frm

CH
*tANLjmdn
. SANTIAGO_
4 @SoSntiodel 'Im..

Li-.ZT \,
Uj

2

I F~-~"PARAGUAY
SALTA

u

206-

0°

j

BOLIVIA

40
2

PAM PA

NEUOUEN 1 ,.

N Neuqu6n,-.
2

RIO

N EG RO

-AO'

40_

Viemo

0

ARGENTINA

NEGRO
,0Rowson

'

CH UB UTr
C
U

PROVINCE
CAPITALS

0

i3 NATIONAL CAPITAL

.>
t

- PROVINCE BOUNDARIES
BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL

j-*-

'

f

SANTA

-

CRUZ

ND

ND-

-Rio Golle8os
s

0

|I

-80-huai

-

- -

R

~

TIERRA

DEL FUEGO
70'
_I

6
I'

0

100 200 300 400 500 600 KILOMETERS
100

200

300

400Mile

Thismopwasproducedby theMap DesignUnitof TheWorldBank.
and anyotherinformotionshown
colors,denominations
Theboundaries,
on thismopdo not imply,on the portof TheWorldBankGroup,any
or
judgmenton ilse geglstotusof anyterritory,or any nmdorsemenl
oaceptnceof suchboundaries.
50'
1A

IL

APRIL
1998

