Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICLAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 21301-MAL

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES

November

15, 2000

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
officialduties. Its contents may not otherwisebe disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
US$1.00 = Rufiyaa(Rf) 11.77
GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL YEAR
JANUARY1- DECEMBER
31
ACRONYMSAND ABBREVIATIONS
ADB
CAE
CAS
CDF
CEM
CFAA
CPI
CPIA
ETP
GDP
GEF
GNP
HIV/AIDS
HNP
IDA
IDF
IFAD
IFC
ILO
IMF
NGO
OED
PEMEB
PER
PRSP
Rf
SAARC
SAFTA
SOE
TA
UN
UNDP
VPAS
WBI

-

-

Asian DevelopmentBank
CountryAssistance Evaluation
CountryAssistance Strategy
ComprehensiveDevelopmentFramework
Country Economic Memorandum
Country FinancialAccountabilityAssessment
Consumer Price Index
Country Policyand Institutional Assessment
Education and Training Projects
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross National Product
Human ImmunodeficiencyVirus/Acquired Inmmunodeficiency Syndrome
Health, Nutrition and Population
International DevelopmentAssociation
Institutional DevelopmentFund
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
International Labor Organization
International Monetary Fund
Non-governmentalOrganization
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Enterprise Monitoring and Evaluation Board
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Rufiyaa
South Asia Associationfor RegionalCooperation
South Asia Free Trade Area
State-owned Enterprise
TechnicalAssistance
United Nations
United Nations DevelopmentProgram
Vulnerability and PovertyAssessment Study
World Bank Institute

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Maldives was discussed on April 4, 1995

VicePresident
Country Director
Task Leader

THE WORLD BANK
Ms. MiekoNishimizu, SARVP
Mr. Fakhruddin Ahmed, SACMV
Mr. Tercan Baysan,SASPR

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. DEVELOPMENTCONTEXT...............................................................1I
1
A. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT................................................................
B. RECENT POLITICAL, SOCIAL,AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS.............1
5
II. MALDIVES' DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVESAND CHALLENGES ........... .............
A. THE COUNTRY'S DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVESAND THE VISION............5
B. PROGRESS TOWARDS THESE OBJECTIVES....................................................6
7
C. KEY DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGESAND PRIORITIES.............. ...................
8
Protecting the Environment................................................................
Strengthening Macroeconomic Framework and
Public Expenditure Management ................................................................8
Strengthening Human Development................................................................ 9
Improving Business Environment............................................................... 10
10
Key Sectoral Issues and Priorities.................................................
III. EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND PROSPECTS.....................................................11
Conductive External Environment and Good Economic Prospects.................11
IV. DEVELOPMENTPARTNERSHIP AND DONOR COORDINATION.....................12
V. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCESTRATEGY.....................................................12
12
A. LESSONS OF PAST IDA SUPPORT.............................................................
14
..............
B. PREPARATIONSFOR THE BANK'S NEW COUNTRY STRATEGY
C. PROPOSED STRATEGY AND ASSISTANCE PROGRAM................................ 14
Strategic Choice.............................................................

15

VI. MONITORINGAND EVALUATION.............................................................

17

.

17

VII. RISKS.......

This documenthas a restricteddistribution and may be used by recipientsonly in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

CHARTS
Chart 1
Chart 2
Chart 3
Chart 4

Growth in GDP and Rate of Inflation (CPI).............................................
4
External Current Account/Budget Deficit (% of GDP)......................................4
Gross Official Reserves.............................................
5
Exports and Imports (% of GDP) .......................................................................5

TABLES
Table I
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4

Income Poverty.......................
3
Total and Social Budget Expenditures, Government Revenues.........................6
Infant Mortality Rate and Life Expectancy.............................................
7
Proposed CAS Core Benchmarks.............
...............................
17

BOXES
Box I

Bank Assistance to the Maldives: An OED Evaluation................................... 14

ATTACHMENTS
Attachment 1 Development Partners - Assistance Programs, 2000 -2004
ANNEXES
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

A2
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
BlO

Maldives at a Glance
Maldives - Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Maldives - Bank Group Program Summaryand IFC and MIGA Program
Summary of Non-lending Services
Maldives - Social Indicators
Maldives - Macro Economic Indicators
Maldives - Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio - Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Maldives - Country Program Matrix (FY01-04)
Maldives - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
During the last two decades, the Maldives has made significant economic and social progress. In
1.
that period, sound economicmanagement and strong donor support enabled the country to grow at 9
percent, achieve a three-fold increase in per capita income, and to make strides in social development,
particularly education of girls. Nevertheless, there is substantial incidence of income poverty, especially in
the outer islands. So, continued strong economic performance is required and further improvements in the
living standards of the poor, particularly in the outer atolls, remain a major development challengefor the
Maldives. In meeting this challenge, the Maldives needs to overcome important structural constraints:the
high cost of infrastructure and social services in a country where population is dispersed over 198 inhabited
islands; a narrow production and export base; vulnerabilities to external and internal shocks; limited
institutional capacity;and a very narrow and vulnerable budgetaryrevenue base.
On the basis of these structural constraints, the Government asked the donor community to
2.
recognize the Maldives as a "special case" at the Sixth Round Table Meeting in Geneva in May 1999, and
received unanimous support for continued concessionalassistance. Prior to this, in June 1998,the Bank's
Board had approved the extension of Maldives' IDA eligibility under the "small island economy
exception" from the IDA cut-off.
Continued strong donor support is a reflection of Maldives' reputation as a good development
3.
performer and effective user of donor assistance. The Government is already practicing the principles of a
comprehensive development framework--effectivelymanagingthe country's consensus-based,broad
development agenda as well as donor coordination. The Governmentwill prepare, with help from IDA and
other key donors, Maldives' poverty reduction strategy.
As one of Maldives' major developmentpartners, IDA has supported Maldives' development
4.
efforts since 1979 through economic work as well as selective, sector-specific projects, first in fisheries to
help boost production and exports, and, since the early 1990s, in the education and training to improve
access and quality, particularly in the outer atolls. The Bank's expertise and funding of priority social
services are valued highly by the Government,the private sector, the civil society, and other donors, as
indicated by the findings of a recent "client survey".
Against this background, the Governmenthas recently requested expanded IDA support. The
5.
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) proposes expanded knowledge transfer through analytical and advisory
activities, technical assistance for institutional capacity building, and a three-year lending program of about
$15-20 million, which would move gradually from a project-based approach to programmatic one. IDA's
analytical services and lending program complementthat of other donors, with a view to strengtheningthe
anti-povertyfocus of Maldives' development.
ISSUESFORBOARDDISCUSSION
6.

In its discussion, the Board may wish to consider the appropriateness of:

the CAS to the Maldives' situation, especially the emphasis on knowledge transfer and capacity
building; and
* a shift in lending from the sector-specificproject approach to a programmatic one.

*

MEMORANDUMOF TIE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONALDEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES

I. DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT
A. The Country Context
The Republic of Maldives consists of about 1200 small, low-lyingcoral islands in the Indian
I.
Ocean, including the 198 now inhabited by about 280,000 people and another 84 developed as resort
islands. Populations of the inhabited islands vary significantly,ranging from less than 150 to around
70,000 in MaIe, the capital island. Maldives has no known mineral resources and agricultural potential is
limited to about 10 percent of its total land size of less than 300 sq kilometers. Tourism and commercial
fisheries, the leading sectors of the economy, rely on the country's precious marine resources. Both
sectors, accounting for 30 percent of GDP, are vulnerable to external shocks as well as to ecological
damage. Due to smallness, remoteness and dispersion of its population and land mass, Maldives is unable
to benefit from scale economies and faces constraints to the mobility of its people and goods. Most
consumer and capital goods and intermediate inputs are imported.
These structural constraints also underscore two important concerns facing the Government:(i)
2.
the high unit costs of infrastructure and social services; and (ii) creating income opportunities in the outer
atolls. Not surprisingly, as in other small and dispersed island economies,the budgetary expendituresare
substantial (50 percent of GDP). Public expendituremanagement therefore assumes an even more central
role in the Maldives to raise the living standards of over 40 percent of its population who are trying to live
on only $1.27 per person per day. Bilateral grants and concessional multilateral loans (about 8 percent of
GDP) constitute an important source of finance. Strong aid coordination and effective partnerships are
therefore important in Maldives' developmentprocess.
B. Recent Political, Social, and Economic Developments
Political setting. Maldives is a republic, with a democratic system of government, organized
3.
around a presidential model. There are no organized political parties, and candidates for elective offices
contest as independents.The Peoples Majlis (the Parliament) has 50 members serving five-yearterms.
Two members from each atoll and two from Male' are directly elected through universal suffrage,and 8
members are appointed by the President. The President is elected for a term of 5 years, through a national
referendum of yes/no votes on the candidate nominated by the Majlis. The administration of the atolls is
carried out by the Atoll Chiefs who are appointed by the President, and the island chiefs are appointed by
the Ministry of Atoll Administration.
In October 1998,President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom was reelected for his fifth term of office.
4.
The political stability brought considerable predictability in the economic policy and institutional
environment, with changes taking place selectively and gradually. There is a strong commitment to
maintaining the society's traditional values and the well functioningformal and informal institutions,
which provide practical--formal and informal--checksand balances for effective governance in the public
sector. A strong sense of community and strong social capital are important strengths in the outer atolls,
and the Government is increasinglytapping this strength by promoting community-based solutionsto
meet the developmentneeds of the atolls. At the same time, there is a concerted effort by the
Governmentto address the important issue of limited institutional capacity faced in most Ministries and
Departments.

5.
Human development. Along with robust economic growth, Maldives' social indicators have
shown significant improvements. Since 1977,life expectancy at birth increased by 16 years and reached
62 years in 1997. Infant mortality was reduced significantly from 121 per thousand to 27, while the crude
death rate fell from 17 per thousand to 5 per thousand by 1997. In education, primary school enrollment
increased from 38 percent in 1982to 98 percent of the age group. And with the contribution of nonformal adult literacy programs, Maldives achieved a literacy rate in excess of 96 percent. Maldives' very
high population growth rate also fell from over 3 percent per annum in the 1980s to about 2.8 percent by
mid-1990s, though the latter is still very high (Annex B5).
6.
Observers agree that Maldivian women are among the most emancipated in South Asia and in the
Islamic world. There is no institutional discrimination along gender lines in access to education and
health services and forjobs in the public sector. School enrollment rates for girls and boys are almost the
same and very high, so are the adult literacy rates. Women are employed in the Government and in
manufacturing,and they account for 70 percent of active persons in agriculture.
7.
Economic growth and income poverty. Sustainedstrong economic growth has raised
Maldives' per capita income to around $1200, but average income levels are lower in the outer atolls.
Due to the highly dispersed nature of inhabited islands and significant differences in the growth rates of
principal economic activities, average growth of per capita income levels of the communities in the outer
atolls appear to have been lower than in Male and nearby atolls. This is not surprising. Male is the
country's dynamic commercial/financialcenter, with a well developed sea port and the country's only
international airport next to it. Naturally, most of the operating tourist resort islands have so far been
developed in the atolls around Male. As such, Male and nearby atolls have benefited more from the direct
as well as indirect spill-over effects of faster growth in tourism, trade, construction, transportation,and
other services.
8.
About 75 percent of the population live in the atolls outside Male, and most of the atolls have
islands with small populations--manyislands are inhabited by populations of less than 200 people.
Principal sources of livelihood are fishing and subsistence agriculture, which currently account for about
17 percent of GDP, down from 24 percent in 1990 due to their slower growth. These two sectors have
grown at an annual average real rate of about 3 percent in the last decade, only marginally above the
population growth rate. In contrast, tourism has grown three times faster. Incomes in the outer atolls are
augmented to some extent with remittances sent by family members working on the resort islands, in the
construction and service sectors, and as seamen in merchant ships--this source of additional income is
reportedly equivalent to about 2.5 percent of GDP.
9.
Thereis still considerable incomepoverty with high incidence in the outer atolls. The findings
of a recent benchmark Vulnerabilityand Poverty Assessment study (VPAS; 1999)'--based on a 1997/98
survey which covered all the inhabited islands--indicatethat income poverty exists everywhere in the
Maldives, though with higher incidence in the atolls. Twenty two percent of Maldives' population falls
below the (lower) income poverty line of Rfl 0 per person per day (about $0.85), while the incidence of
income poverty jumps to 43 percent of the entire population when the higher income poverty line of Rfl 5
per person per day ($1.27) is taken. In the outer atolls the incidence of income poverty for both income
poverty lines is found to be 2 1/2times that of Male (Table 1).2

1
Republic of Maldives: Vulnerabilityand Poverty Assessment, Ministry of Planning and National Development and
United Nations Development Programme, 1999. Also, detailed information and assessments on the economy as well as on the
key development challenges of the Maldives are available in the recently completed CEM entitled: Maldives-CountryEconomic

Memorandum: Policiesfor Sustaining Economic Growth, April 19, 1999, Rep. No. 18340-MAL.

While the latter per capita/per day income poverty figures are not PPP-adjusted for international comparison, they could
nevertheless be treated as comparablewith the $1/day figure that is the base for international comparisons. This is because
Maldives' economy is very open and, except for fish, almost everything is imported.
2

2

Table 1: Maldives: Income Poverty
Percent of population Below Poverty Line

(Rf 15)\a

(Rf 10)\a

43
22
National
10
20
Male
Atolls
50
26
\a Povertylines:Rufiyaaper person/day;Rf 11.77=US$1
10.
Maldives' economic and social statistics are weak, and there are no regular household
expenditure/incomesurveys that would allow definitive assessments. With only one household survey
(the VPAS), it is not possible to examine the past trends in income distribution and changes in Maldives'
poverty situation over time. Therefore, it is also difficult to ascertain with certainty how the people in
different locations and income groups have fared in sharing the benefits of Maldives' sustained strong
economic growth in recent times.
11.
Other dimensions of poverty and the key factors behind regional disparities. Maldives'
structural constraints and the resulting high cost of infrastructure and social services, which rises even
more markedly for the outer atolls, severely limit the range of economic activities that the island
communitiescould engage in. These significant barriers restrain economic growth and social
development in the outer atolls, tending to increase their vulnerabilities. Government efforts aimed at
reducing incomepoverty and regional disparities through the use ofpublic expenditureprogramsface
rising costs, thus limiting the impact of a given amount offinancial resources. To a certain extent, this
may also explain why there are significant differences in favor of Male in both the supply and quality of
the existing social and infrastructure services, thus worsening the disparity in the living standards between
Male and the atolls. Not surprisingly the findings of the VPAS show that the communities in the atolls
are about 4 times more vulnerable than those of Male.
12.
Generally the larger islands have the most satisfactory social services. Such islands account for
40 percent of the population. In the areas of education and health, the results of the VPAS establish that
the existing disadvantages in access to such services are closely correlated with the small size of
population on the islands. About 15 percent of the atoll population reportedly has to travel more than two
hours by boat to reach the nearest health center or hospital. Despite the Government's efforts to provide
safe drinking water to everyone, more than half of the island population has less than 4 liters of potable
water per person per day--the current national target, which is still low by international standards. Access
to adequate sanitation is even lower. The disparities in health, water and sanitation are reflected in lower
life expectancy rates in the outer atolls than in Mal--60 and 68 years, respectively.
The inter-island transportation services for the population are very infrequent, expensive and
13.
problematic. More than half of all islands have difficulties in access due to problems with harbors,
absence of jetties, impassable shallow waters and impenetrable reefs. While significant progress has been
made in the electrification of the atolls, about 28 percent of the atolls' population reportedly has
electricity for 6 hours or less each day. This, as emphasized by the island communities themselves during
the CAS consultations,restricts their income earning activities.
Malnutrition appears as a serious problem. There is a very high incidence of stunted growth
14.
among children, with much higher incidence in the atolls. The evidence provided by the VPAS survey
indicates that in the atolls 43 percent of children in the 1-5 age group suffer from stunted growth (low
height-for-age); this indicator is 16 percent for Male and 36 percent for the country. A combination of
factors explains Maldives' high malnutrition incidence,particularly in the atolls: the dietary habits with
restricted range of foods; lack of awareness about nutritious diets; limited supply of locally grown
vegetables and fruits (due to the rudimentary nature of farming) and the high cost of imported fruits and
vegetables.
3

15.
Lookingforward, the key challengefor the Government is to facilitate further and sustainable
improvementsin the living standards of the population, particularly in the outer atolls where living
standards are the lowest. This requires strengtheningprograms aimed at reducing regional disparities in
access to social and infrastructure services, and supportingsustained and broad-based economic growth
and human development.
16.
Recent economic performance. Since the late 1970s,helped by its rich marine resources,
tourism, and good economic management,the Maldives has achieved an annual average GDP growth rate
of over 9 percent. Its per capita real income rose more than threefold. In the 1990s, moderation of the
growth of fisheries reduced the annual GDP growth rate somewhat, though it still remained strong in the
6 to 9 percent range. Tourism--mainlyfrom Europe--registered 9 percent annual average growth (and
double-digit growth in five out of ten years) during the last decade and acted as a catalyst for activity in
construction,transportation, trade and banking. Overall, the private sector has become increasinglymore
dynamic, competent and capable of expanding further in an economy rendered very open by the islands'
total dependence on imports and pronounced export orientation. The public sector has also made
improvements.The budget deficit, for instance, declined from over 17 percent of GDP in 1993to around
3 percent by 1998, a period during which the external current account deficit also dropped from 25 to 7
percent of GDP. Rising net private capital inflows and official development assistance enabled build up
of foreign exchange reserves to four and half months of imports cover instead of two in 1993.
Additionally, inflation rates fell from the high teens to low single-digit levels (Charts 1-4; Annex B6).
17.
In 1999, economic growth continued to be strong at 8.5 percent, and inflation was moderate at 3
percent. However, some fiscal slippage took place as a result of expenditure overruns associated with the
purchase of cost guard vessels, infrastructure expenditures linked to the recent expansion in tourism, and
unbudgeted 35 percent increase in public sector wages/salaries--effectivefrom September 1999 (and the
first increase for public servants since the early 1990s). The budget deficit rose from 2.8 percent in 1998
to over 4 percent. At the same time, the high import content of these additional expenditures, rising oil
prices, the fall in the international tuna prices, and larger imports associated with the development of new
resorts led to a more than doubling of the external current account deficit to over 15 percent of GDP. The
overall external deficit, however, was much smaller due to significant private capital inflows. To ensure
continued macroeconomic stability, the Government is determined to maintain fiscal discipline, with
emphasis on expenditure restraint and fiscal consolidation to strengthen the macroeconomic framework
(see Part II below for details). With respect to future external balances, tourism revenues are expectedto
grow as the additional capacity is increasinglyutilized, while the growth of import demand for
construction material moderates with the completion of 14 new resorts. These developmentsand the
possible reductions in international oil prices should enable the country to meet the repayments becoming
due on the foreign loans contracted for financing the development of these new resorts.

1

Chart 1: Growth in GDP and Rate of
Inflation (CPI)

Chart 2: External Current
Account/Budget
Deficit (% of GDP)
15.0

U

2

5

.0 |

RealGDP
Rate

growth

ofkiflation

10.0
(CP

-

ExtemaiCAB

|.0

2 00

0.00-

15.0

\.0

10.0

j

-

-10.0

5.0
5 .0

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~15.0
~~~~~~~~~~~~2
0.0

,.

0.0

IV

-25.0

-5.0

0

3 0.0

eV2 v3 5n C

p

V2 e2 52 V2 en o2

le

4

le

le

1s

lse

s9

se

Chart 4: Exports andlmports

Chart 3: Gross official reserves
5.0

______________(%

4.0

0

Export of Goods

110.0

as months
Reserves
of imports

4.5

of GDP)

130.0

11

|3.5

.
$
&90.0

3.05

70.0

2.5

: _*-IK

--

)K -

)K

)K90

ImportofGoods

K.50.0

d

2.0

30.0

1.5

10.0

1.0

Maldives' strong economicperformance and improvementsin social indicators are a tribute to
18.
good economic management. While ensuring macroeconomicstability and considerable certainty in the
policy environment, the Government has adopted a pragmatic approach to the role of the state in
economic activity and in the provision of social/infrastructureservices. The Government has shown
flexibility and determination in responding to short-term destabilizing shocks with difficult fiscal and
monetary adjustment decisions (as occurred in the early 1990s),while also gradually liberalizingthe
economy and paving the way for a growing and maturing private sector. Indeed, by following sound
economic management, pursuing an open, export-oriented growth strategy, and a liberal labor market
access policy that allows expatriate workers to fill importantskill gaps, the Maldives has performed better
than most island economies in exploiting its marine resources, human resource base, and in using foreign
aid effectively.
In the 1990s, donor support provided relatively significant amounts of resources, enablingthe
19.
Maldives to undertake some priority development programs that would not have been feasible with the
available Government tax and non-tax resources (Table 2). Bilateral grants and concessional loans
averaged about 10 percent of GDP in the early 1990s and around 8 percent of GDP annually in recent
years. These funds supported 20 percent of public expenditures in the priority areas, but there has been
occasional recourse to monetization of the budget deficit and to costly borrowing from foreign
commercial sources. While tax reforms are being considered to broaden the very narrow tax base and
thus reduce vulnerability,these will take time to produce results and they are not expected to increase the
already quite high tax-to-GDP ratio significantly(Table 2). And borrowing at commercial rates from the
international financial markets to finance Maldives' developmentneeds, even it were possible beyond the
recent modest levels, would be very costly, and risky, for the Maldives at this stage of its development.
Borrowing too heavily from the Maldives Monetary Authority would crowd out credit to the private
sector if macroeconomic stability is to be maintained. These factors highlight that, in the medium-term,
to pursue sustained growth and reductions in poverty and regional disparities, the Maldives will need
continued concessional donor assistance.
II.

MALDIVES' DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND CHALLENGES

A. The Country's Development Objectives and the Vision
In managing Maldives' economicand social development, the Government has been practicing
20.
the principles that underpin a comprehensive developmentframework (CDF). First, the Governmenthas
adopted a holistic and longer-termview of development. In pursuing the nation's developmentgoals, the
Government has emphasized both the human developmentand infrastructure needs as well the
macroeconomic stability and market reform challenges of the country. Second, internal consultations
have been used as a key vehicle for determining the country's own vision of development objectives and
needs. Third, the Government has mobilized internal and external partnerships in formulating,
prioritizing, and implementingthe country's developmentprograms. As indicated in the sections below,
5

while there are many donors in the Maldives,the Government has managed donor coordination directly
and has been able to streamline and strategically use donor support. The Government intends to follow
this holistic and inclusive approach in the future, and has recently initiated nationwide community
consultations on the development needs with a view to reformulating the country's long-term
developmentvision and strategic priorities. The results will be used for determining the country's
medium-termdevelopment programs and priorities in the forthcoming Sixth National Development Plan
and feed into the formulation of Maldives' Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The Government
has started the work on the PRSP, which is expected to be completed in 2001.
21.
For the long-term, improving the living standards, especially in the outer atolls, by sustaining its
impressive economic and social advances well into the future remains Maldives' key development
objective. As the country strives to achieve these objectives, the Government's Fifth National
Development Plan (1997-2000) and its articulation of a national vision describe the Maldives of the year
2020 as a country firmly established on a sustainable developmentpath, with:
*

much improved living standards, and reduced disparities between Male and the outer atolls; a
smaller number of inhabited islands, facilitating economies of scale in the provision of social and
infrastructureservices; and much reduced population growth rate;

*

a robust economy, based on sustainable use of marine resources and driven by a larger and more
diversified tourism and fisheries sectors, expanded agriculturalactivities, and more skilled and
motivated work force;

*

the planned South and North growth centers well established, providing alternatives to the capital
city Male as important centers of settlement and economicopportunities;

*

higher quality and expanded education/healthservices; and

*

a decentralized administration, and a well-developedlegal/regulatory andjudicial system.

22.
In pursuing the national development goals, it is also the intention of the Government to make
more effective use of informationtechnology and distance learning opportunities to bring informationto
the isolated islands and link them within the country and with the outside world.
B. Progress Towards These Objectives
23.
The Governmentis addressing regional disparities. Regional disparities in incomes and
economic opportunities are well recognized by the Government,and are addressed through the
developmentprograms targeting the atolls. Such efforts will help improve the standards of living in the
outer atolls by creating opportunities for employment and income earning activities, and thus play a
critical role in reducing poverty in the outer atolls. In parallel with this increasing focus on the atolls, the
size of social expenditures increased from 17.5 percent of GDP in 1990to 21.4 percent in 1999 (Table 2),
with many programs in education, health care, and community development directed to the atolls.
Similarly,the atolls are benefiting from some infrastructure programs, including rural electrification,
potable water, and transport. Indeed, the improvingtrends in the infant mortality rates and life
expectancy in the atolls in tandem with the national trends reflect the positive impacts of these efforts
(Table 3).

Table2:

Total Government
Expenditures

Spending on
Social Services \a
l

Government Revenues
(excluding grants)
[Total
Tax Non-tax
In percent of GDP
17.5
32.7 20.6 12.1

1990

51.5

1995

53.5

16.5

37.7

20.0

17.7

1999

51.0

21.4

39.7

20.3

19.4

\a: Education, health, social security/welfare,and communityprograms.

6

TABLE 3:

INFANT MORTALITYRATE (IMR)
(per 1000 live births)
Maldives

Male

Atolls

LIFE EXPECTANCY AT BIRTH

Maldives

Male

Atolls

1985 Census

121

95

127

50

55

49

1990 Census

88

73

91

56

60

56

1995 Census

72

55

76

60

64

59

VRS (1997/98)\a

27\c
62

68

60

Female

64

69

62

Male

61

67

59

VPAS (1997/98)\b

\a Vital Registration System (1997/98), Min. Of Health. \b Vulnerabilityand Poverty Assessment Study (1999).
\cThis is the nuotedofficial IMR figcnre-given hy the VRS The VPAS gives an IMR of 62-

24.
Gradual progress in structural reforms. In recent years some reforms have been introduced to
strengthen the institutional and economic policy environment. The Government has long recognized the
importance of protecting the environment and has just formulated the (second) National Environmental
Action Plan, enacted an Environmental Protection Law, prepared several disaster preparedness and
mitigation programs, and conducted public awareness campaigns. There is no direct evidence of
corruption in the Maldives. Nevertheless, an Anti-Corruption Board was established in 1991 with a
mandate to investigate any complaint about corrupt practices in the public sector. Although the latter
board's investigations are not made public, there is no indication of a serious corruption problem in the
public sector. A Public Enterprise Monitoring and Evaluation Board (PEMEB) was established in 1994
with a mandate to provide oversight of the operations of SOEs and develop reform strategies for them.
More recently, the Government has launched programs to strengthen the institutional capacity of the
Audit Office and to improve the judicial system. To ensure that women continue to play an important role
in Maldives' economic life and fully participate in the development process, the Government is taking
steps to: increase girls' access to education; promote income generating activities through targeted microcredit schemes (supported by IFAD); establish gender balance in the atoll and island development
committees; increase the number of women in senior positions in the Government; and promote the same
in the private sector.
25.
In recent years, the Peoples Majlis has enacted a number of commercial laws, including the Law
of Contract, the Negotiable Instruments Law, and the Companies Act, and amended the tourism law to
extend the 21-year resort lease period to 24 years. A draft labor law, which covers the core labor
standards, was recently prepared with the help of ILO and is waiting the review of the Law Commission.
These laws and amendments in the existing ones have constituted an important beginning towards
establishing a commercial legal base which is crucial for the development of efficient markets and for
fostering growth in private sector activity.
C. Key Development Challenges and Priorities3
26.
While many of Maldives' development objectives are achievable, and recent reform measures
will contribute to this effort, it is also recognized that the Maldives still needs to tackle a formidable set of
development challenges on a broad front to achieve sustained economic growth and poverty reduction.

3 The 1999 CEM provides a detailed assessment of Maldives' development challenges.

7

27.

These challenges include:
*

protecting the islands' fragile environment;

*

strengthening macroeconomic framework and public sector management;

*

strengtheninghuman development;

*

improvingthe business environment; and

*

addressing key sectoral issues/prioritiesin tourism, fisheries, land-use and urban development.

28.
Stronger and better-focussed government effort is now necessary to tackle these development
challenges. Building on the successes that the Maldives has scored in recent years, the Government, in
partnership with civil society and the donor community, could lead this effort. In particular, actions that
further stimulate private initiative can also enable a streamlined government to set and better execute its
priority responsibilities. Strengthenedpublic sector management will become increasingly critical to
support strong economic growth, to ensure that this growth is broad-based, and that public sector
expenditureprograms serve towards reducing poverty and vulnerabilities in the Maldives, particularlyin
the outer atolls. These programs, with an increasing emphasis on decentralized community-based
components, can play an important catalytic role in empowering local populations and promoting targeted
poverty-alleviationprograms in support of improved local infrastructure and income-generatingactivities.
Protecting the Environment
29.
Protecting the environment. Maldives has been following ajudicious policy to protect its
environmental resources. However, much still remains to be done, in environmental management
generally and coastal zone management in particular to protect Maldives' fragile and invaluable coral
reefs and coasts. These are under increasing stress from larger volumes of untreated sewage and solid
waste disposal. Rapid population growth is bringing depletion of water resources in general and the
supply of clean water in particular. There is indication that over-fishing of several reef fisheries is
reducing marine diversity, while the growing demand for land for housing is shrinking vegetation cover.
There is also long-term vulnerabilityto dangers of global climate change and sea level rise. Technical
assistance is needed to establish an effective policy/institutionalframework to protect Maldives'
invaluable natural assets. Specifically, improvementsin institutional capacity in environmental
monitoring and enforcement are needed. Strengtheningof the atoll administrations as well as island
communities will facilitate effective decentralized management of natural resources. Further
improvements in policies are needed to protect corals and coastal zones, while also improving access to
alternative construction materials to stop coral/sand mining. It is particularly critical to reform the
provision of environmental infrastructureto meet the challenge of delivery of necessary water and
sanitation services to the island communities. In fisheries, there is the need to develop and implement a
community-based"reef fisheries resources management regime", together with appropriate mechanisms
for managing "access rights" to fisheries and reef resources.
Strengthening MacroeconomicFramework and Public Expenditure Management
30.
Strengthening the macroeconomicframework. To sustain Maldives' strong economic
performance and social advances, and maintain fiscal discipline well into the future, there is a need to
further strengthen the macroeconomic framework by reforming the tax system. At present, customs
duties and a fixed rate ($6 per day/per room/per person) tourism tax make up the tax system. Early
actions to develop simple income and indirect tax systemswould be prudent to reduce the vulnerability
arising from heavy reliance on customs and tourism revenues. This would also cushion the Maldives, a
member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), from potential revenue
losses and adverse "trade diversion" effects when the South Asia Free Trade Area (SAFTA) is
established.
8

31.
Strengthening public expenditure management. There is scope for enhancing the
Government's development effectiveness as a central provider of social and infrastructure services. This
requires institutional capacity building in public expenditure management. A basic prerequisite in this
area is to improve the public accounts system and develop an accessible information base on public
finances. Also important are actions in several areas, including: the updating of the sectoral strategies in
light of the findings of the Vulnerabilityand Poverty Assessment study; adoption of a medium-term,
rolling public sector expenditure framework that is formulated around a "core program" of priority
developmentexpenditures; and the strengtheningof budgetary processes.
32.
With respect to the state-owned enterprises (SOEs), the medium/long-termobjective should be to
privatize some SOEs that have no natural monopoly or public good aspects--for example, State Trading
Organization (STO), Maldives Transport and ContractingCompany (MTCC), and Maldives Industrial
Fisheries Company (MIFCO). In this regard, an early introductionof a domestic tax system will be
particularly importantto reduce the Government 's heavy reliance on SOEs as a source of (non-tax)
revenue and to pave the way for privatization. In the meantime, the performance of the SOEs could be
improved by: ending of the existing monopoly privileges of some SOEs in commercial activities; hiving
off some activities that could be left to the private sector; discontinuing government interference in the
economic/financialdecisions of SOEs; and ensuring that SOEs regularly service their debts to the
Governmentand pay rent for the use of state land.
33.
Promoting broad-basedgrowth. One of the key developmentchallenges facing the
Government is to reduce regional disparities in living standards by facilitating increased access to social
and infrastructure services and economic opportunities in the outer atolls. Stronger focus on atoll/island
development is needed. At present, some elements of an atoll/island development strategy are being
developed. The North/South growth centers which are being developed by the Government with donor
assistance are expected to help in providing better social/infrastructureservices, facilitate population
consolidation, create economic opportunities and thus help in the achievement of more broad-based
growth. In the long-term,these growth nodes should facilitate the development of new tourism areas and
wider spillover effects for the outer atolls. Greater community involvement,building on the strong sense
of community and capacity building at the local decision making level, will contribute to effective
implementation in social and infrastructure services and in economic diversification.
34.
Improving Governance. "Good governance" is one of the key development objectives
highlighted by the latest National Development Plan, which defines governance objectives as: the
establishment of a modem public administration; a comprehensive and transparent set of laws; and an
impartial and competentjudiciary. As highlighted by the Bank's recently completed Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA) report,fiurther assistance in institutional capacity building is needed
to help the Government cope with increasingly more complex economicpolicy and public sector
expendituremanagement decisions and develop a good public accounting system. Skill shortages are a
serious constraint to the modernization of the public sector and to the continued strengtheningof the
private sector. Continued support will also be needed to help further strengthen the judicial system.
Stren2thenins!Human Development
35.
The Maldives has achieved commendableprogress in human development since the 1970s.
However, a backlog of issues remains, requiring continued Govemment effort and donor support. A
growing need to enhance quality and access, especially in the atolls, and to contain rising expenditure
pressures mark the state of education. There is a serious shortage of skilled Maldivians, and the
economy's growing need for qualified workers and professionals is being met by expatriate workers. At
the same time, the number of more educated (with ten years of schooling) but untrained young men and
women is increasing, and will continue to increase given the youthful age structure of the population (47
percent below 15 years of age). Enhanced capacity and quality of Maldives' seven post-secondary
technical training institutes would provide opportunities for more youth to gain skills that are in demand.
9

This would also help reduce Maldives' need for expatriate workers. The need for overseas university
training will continue.
36.
High maternal mortality rates, nutrition gaps and the increasing importance of noncommunicablediseases as causes of death and morbidity characterize the health sector. A population
growth rate that still continues to be very high (2.8 percent) drives mounting pressures on social and
infrastructure services and the environment. Accordingly, continued efforts are needed to strengthenthe
existing human development strategies and programs. Those efforts need to emphasize quality and
priority setting. Renewed effort is needed to focus on allocating resources more rigorously to high
impact, cost-effective interventions where the private sector is unable to participate, including: more
resources to counseling and advice for birth spacing and family planning; promoting nutrition programs;
further strengtheningpreventive programs against such diseases as HIV/AIDS; and to developing a
smaller number of better-trained and better paid government health workers. Promoting better water and
sanitation facilities will also have direct and indirect health benefits.
Improvins Business Environment
37.
While there has been progress in improving the policy/institutionalenvironment and
infrastructureto promote the development of the private sector, the Government recognizes that the
existing institutions should be modernized and new ones should be established as the economy matures
and becomes increasinglymore complex and integrated with the rest of the world. In particular, there is
an increasing need for a well functioning commercial legal/judicial system and an efficient and modern
public administration.The Government has enacted some new laws and amended the existing ones to
improve their usefulness (see para. 25). However, much remains to be done in this area, including the
enactment of other needed legislation, such as a land act, a new mortgage law, a bankruptcy act, and a
legislation for the recovery of debt.
38.
A sound, efficient and diversifiedfinancial sector is critical to the development of the private
sector and to sustaining economic growth in the Maldives. The country's banking system is inadequateto
meet the growing financial needs of the economy. Little innovation can be expected from the current four
banks (three owned by public banks in the neighboring countries and one state-owned Maldives Bank),
which have little incentive to improve performance and introduce new financial instruments to better
serve the needs of the productive sector and of the poor. The three foreign banks have weak corporate
governancestructures in their home countries, which are characterized by inadequate regulatory,
supervisoryand disclosure systems. To address this issue, the Bank has recommended that reputable
international banks from countries with strong regulatory, supervisory and disclosure standards be invited
to operate in the country. This approach should be complemented by developing an effective system for
delivering financial services to the poor, notably by strengtheningthe existing microfinance operations,
especially those in the outer atolls.
Key Sectoral Issues and Priorities
39.
Tourism will continue to be the leading sector of the economy, and it could support sustained
economic growth and employment generation throughout the country given its rich potential and good
prospects in tourism. However, to ensure this sector's sustainablegrowth, it is important that the policy
environment remains conducive and competitive. Accelerating efforts aimed at strengthening of the
domestic financial markets and the development of non-bank financial intermediation (e.g., leasing) will
be important for providing long-term financing to the sector. On the policy side, further extension of the
lease period is worth considering. This will give a longer-term time horizon to investors, promote better
maintenance practices and longer-term strategies for market and product development.
40.
The fisheriessector is considered a strategic sector, given that it has been the principal source of
livelihood to the vast majority of the Maldives' atolls population,providing incomes and employmentto
over one quarter of the local labor force, much of their nutrition, and also contributing to the country's
foreign exchange earnings. There is some potential for further expansion in tuna catches, and reef
fisheries could become an important source of income/employmentif managed in a sustainable manner.
10

However, there are some key policy and institutional constraints that need to be addressed, including: the
removal of the state's monopoly over production and export of canned tuna and frozen fish; the
elimination of distortionary,administratively fixed tuna procurement pricing policy; the development and
implementation of a community-based"reef fisheries resources management regime" and of an
appropriate "access right" regime for the tuna fisheries.
Addressing land-tenure, housing and urban development issues would require going beyond the
41.
heavily subsidized social housing programs and sizeable land reclamation projects. Finding a long-lasting
solution to the problem requires measures aimed at addressing Maldives' basic deficiencies in the land
tenure system pertaining to titles, transfer, the legal/regulatoryframework and land development.
III.

EXTERNALENVIRONMENTAND PROSPECTS

Conducive External Environment and Good Economic Prospects
Despite its vulnerability to external shocks, Maldives' economy has been performing remarkably
42.
well. This healthy momentum could well continue in the first years of the new century, even strengthened
if the actions discussed above are taken to promote further developmentof the private sector. World oil
prices are expectedto moderate, and the short-termoil price-related adverse impact on the economic
growth rate of the G-7 countries is projected to be less than half of a percentage point in 2001, with no
impact in 2002. The negative short-term-growthimpact in the Euro Area is projected to be even smaller.
Expected robust economic growth and price stability in the G-7 countries promise medium-termbenefits
for the Maldives that could grow even more with economic recovery in Japan and more widely in Asia.
With sustained sound macroeconomicmanagement and fiscal consolidation,the additional 25
43.
percent capacity from the 14 new resorts, further improvementsin the policy environment for tourism and
fisheries, and related expansion in construction and other service activities, the economy could sustain 7
percent or higher growth with stable prices, sustainablefiscal and external balances, and a comfortable
(and needed) level offoreign exchange reserves. This is a highly likely medium-term scenario for the
Maldives (Annex B6). Downside risks of temporarily falling tuna prices (as experienced recently) or
tourist arrivals exist. In the event of such setbacks, the strong reserve position and appropriate exchange
rate adjustments should provide cushion for meeting the resulting balance of payments impacts,while
expenditure restraint might become necessary to adjust to the resulting fall in budgetary revenues. A
prolonged, depressed tourism activity would slow down economic growth and adversely affect the
balance of payments, budget, and employment. However, such a scenario does not appear likely in the
medium-term, given the generally positive global economic outlook, particularly in the European Union,
and the continuing diversification in tourism products and markets.
The medium-term projections described above assume that private capital inflows (mainly to the
44.
tourism sector) will slow down somewhat following the completion of 14 new resorts--falling below the
1999 levels when it reached 11 percent of GDP, then stabilizing around 5-6 percent. Using the
information provided by the Governmentand the key donors regarding their future assistance programs,
these base case projections also assume a level of net medium- and long-term concessional donor lending
that is comparable in (current) US dollar terms to those achieved in recent years and a slow and gradual
decline in official grants.
As noted earlier, prospects for such levels of concessional assistance are strong. At the Sixth
45.
Round Table Meeting for the Maldives, held in Geneva on May 11, 1999, there was unanimous
agreement on the part of the multilateral and bilateral developmentpartners that the Maldives should be
accorded "special consideration" and continued treatment as a "special case", in view of the
vulnerabilities,and economic, structural and institutional constraints facing the country. There were also
strong expressions of commitment to continue supportingMaldives' development agenda.

11

46.
Although Maldives' per capita income (of around $1,200 in 1999) is above the operational IDA
cut-off, its IDA eligibility was extended in June 1998 under the "small island economy exception"
provided for in the IDA 11 replenishment and it remains eligible for this exception under IDA 12. This
decision reflects Maldives' cited structural constraints.
IV. DEVELOPMENTPARTNERSHIPAND DONOR COORDINATION
47.
In recent years, official development assistanceto the Maldives has averaged about $28 million
annually. This assistance--aboutevenly split between grants and concessional loans--has been critical for
Maldives' developmentefforts. Attachment I summarizes the assistance programs of the country's main
development partners. The World Bank Group,the Asian Development Bank, and the United Nations
Agencies are the major multilateral donors, and Japan is the principal bilateral donor. The Islamic
Development Bank and the Kuwait Fund are providing support on a case-by-case basis as projects are
submitted by the Government. Australia has a rolling medium-termassistance program. There are
several other bilateral and multilateral donors, mostly with small and sporadic contributions. As noted
earlier, the Government is managing donor coordination directly. Overall coordination is supported by
the UNDP through the Round Table Meetings (RTM), organized every 4-5 years.
48.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is the other major multilateral donor, with a lending
program that has focused on infrastructure (power, transportation), post-secondary education, and a
technical assistance program directed to capacity building in the monetary authority, the audit office, and
the Statistics Division. In the medium-term (over the period 2001-2003), the ADB is planning to
continue its support in post-secondary education and infrastructure (including rural electrification), while
shifting its focus towards regional development. The UN agencies have supported the Maldives since the
mid-1970s in the areas of human and atoll/islanddevelopment. Over the next several years, the UNDP's
assistance program will continue to promote income earning activities in the outer atolls, provide support
for capacity building in managing the development process at the atoll and island levels, and also help the
Government in the areas of environmental protection and the preservation of bio-diversity, with support
from GEF. Japan, the most important grant-aid bilateral donor, will continue supporting infrastructure
projects in the key areas such as outer islands electrification and infrastructure to protect large settlements
against natural disasters (e.g., seawalls).
V.

THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. Lessons of Past IDA Support
49.
The Bank's involvement in the Maldives has been limited and selective. From 1979to the
present, the assistanceprogram included seven IDA projects totaling about $65 million, four full CEMs,
one economic update, and an IDF grant to support capacity building for public enterprise monitoring and
reform. IDA's lending has so far focussed on the leading economic activities and related infrastructure,
as well as human resource development. The First, Second, and the Third Fisheries Projects--the third
closed in December 1997--contributedto increased fish production, exports, and the incomes of
fishermen in the outer atolls. IDA has supported the developmentof tourism through the MaIl Airport
UpgradingProject (US$7.5 million), which closed in 1994. The project addressed a critical infrastructure
bottleneck for further private investment in the tourism sector and assisted in the development of the
Airport Authority's management capability.
50.
IDA has also supported human resource development in recent years. The FY89 Education and
Training Project ($8.2 million) helped in the expansion and improvement of secondary education, by
broadening access in the outer atolls, improvingthe planning and management capacity in the Ministry of
Education and providing overseas scholarships for critical skills training. The Second Education and
Training Project ($13.4 million), which closed in June 2000, built upon the improvements made under the
first project while striving towards quality enhancements.
12

Under the previous CAS of February 1995, IDA's strategy focused on: (i) sustaining strong
51.
economic growth to raise incomes and further reduce poverty in the outer atolls; (ii) broadening access to
social services and improving quality; (iii) supporting private sector development; and (iv) strengthening
institutional capacity. The 1995 CAS called for one project every three or four years in support of these
developmentpriorities. In line with these objectives, the Third Education and Training Project ($17.6
million), approved by the Board in March, 2000 and now under implementation,aims at: further
increasing secondary school access in the atolls; expandingthe in-countryteacher training capacity and
other skill training facilities; support updating/printing of primary and secondary curriculum and
educational materials; support the overseas post-secondary training scholarship program; and assist the
Ministry of Education with the strengthening of education planning and financing.
Portfolio management. The current portfolio includes one project--the Third Education and
52.
Training Project cited above. Project implementation in the Maldives has been good, despite limited
government capacity. In particular, the Education and TrainingProjects (ETP) have been implemented
very well. The Second ETP met or exceeded all its objectives, and disbursements were in line with
appraisal estimates.
Analytical/advisoryactivities. Bank's economic work has provided periodic assessmentof the
53.
economy's performance and of the key development issues and challenges. The findings of various Bank
reports informed the Government,the Bank, civil society, and the other donors about these key issues,
providing cross-countrylessons and options to address Maldives' development challenges. Sound
analysis, country examples, and policy dialogue have been instrumental in developing government
ownership for some of the recommendationsmade in the latest CEM, several of which--including some
pertaining to tourism, fisheries, land-tenure/propertyrights, and the business environment--arebeing
implemented.
Lessons. On the whole, IDA's support has been satisfactoryin reaching the stated objectives, and
54.
particularly successful in the education and skills training area. A Country Assistance Evaluation
prepared by OED in June 1999 reported that of the five projects completed then, all were rated
satisfactory upon completion. Three of four projects rated for sustainabilitywere considered likely to be
sustainable and three of four were considered to have had a substantial institutional developmentimpact.
Borrower and Bank performance were satisfactoryfor each project, with Bank performance in the Third
Fisheries Project rated unsatisfactorybecause of inadequate attention to structural issues in the fisheries
sector. In several respects the effectiveness of IDA's support could have been enhanced. These elements,
some of which were also highlighted in the OED's report (Box 1), are incorporated in this proposed
strategy. They include:
*

increased analytical and advisory work, with a combinationof more frequent, issue-specific, short
policy notes, and somewhat spaced out, more comprehensive, diagnostic economic work;

*

stronger coordination and collaborationwith other donors;

*

more support for institutional capacity building;

*

emphasis on the protection of Maldives' fragile environment; and

*

carrying out a benchmark public expenditure review (to be followed subsequently by focussed
PER updates), and assessing the institutional capacity needs in public expenditure management.

13

Box 1: Bank Assistance to the Maldives: An OED Evaluation
In June 1999, the Operations Evaluations Departmentprepared a Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) of IDA's involvement
in the Maldives since the country became a member of the World Bank in 1978. The CAE stated that IDA played a positive,
albeit limited, role in the Maldives. It noted that the Bank made a significantcontribution to manpower development through
two education projects and supported growth in tourism by helping upgrade the airport in Maid.And that the Bank's economic
repornsprovided a valuable periodic extemal overview of the economy. The CAE also highlighted that in fisheries, although
three Bank projects helped modemize the fishing fleet and strengthen public sector capacity in collecting, processing, and
exporting fish, the Bank should have done more to help liberalizefisheries rather than strengthening the public sector presence.
The CAE also reported that IDA should have placed more emphasis on two key areas: (i) the protection of Maldives' fragile
environment, and (ii) private sector development.
The CAE recommendedthat the Bank, in collaboration with other donors, help the Govemment:
.
phase the public sector out of direct commercial activities, while strengthening the govemment's capacity to monitor
and regulate private activity;
.
establish an efficient targeted safety net to replace the current public sector involvement in commercial activities to
meet social transfer objectives;
.
prepare a public expenditure review to help improve revenues and expendituresas part of a strategy to deal with the
eventual phase-out of concessionalextemal financing; and
.
integrate environmentalpolicies into all aspects of economic development in the Maldives.
This CAS concurs with the above recommendationsand incorporates these into the design of the CAS to enhance the relevance
and sustainabilityof IDA's support to the Maldives.

B. Preparations for the Bank's New Country Strategy

55.
In view of the significant remaining development needs, the Bank responded to the Government's
recent request for expanded IDA assistance and stronger policy dialogue by indicating that the
formulation of IDA's future assistance would be done within the context of a new CAS. As an initial
step, after a five-year interval in economic work, an Economic Memorandum (CEM) was prepared in
1999. The CEM has facilitated some diagnostic work, deepened and broadened the policy dialogue
beyond education and fisheries, and helped in assessing some of the key development challenges/issues
and in identifying options for addressing these.
56.
To determine the key elements of the Bank's assistanceprogram, its strategic focus, as well as the
appropriate instruments, a consultative approach has been followed. Consultations were held with the
Government,the private sector, domestic and foreign NGOs, the UN agencies based in Male, and other
multilateral and bilateral agencies. A Bank team visited some islands in the North and in the South and
spent time with the island communities to learn about their specific issues and priority needs. The team
returned with the knowledge of their strong community organizations and the feedback that quality
education, health services, electricity, transportation, and environmental infrastructure (water and
sanitation) are high on their agenda, and that there are pressing needs in nutrition and population areas.
C. Proposed Strategy and Assistance Program

57.
The Bank's proposed strategy for the Maldives for FY2001-FY2004has been formulated taking
account of: (i) the country's developmentobjectives/strategy and its request for IDA's support in
institutional strengtheningand policy assessment; (ii) the consultations with the island communities, the
private sector,NGOs, and the donors that are active in the Maldives; (iii) the diagnostic work carried out
for the latest CEM; (iv) the results of a recently completed "client survey", which stress more frequent
contacts and analytical/advisoryactivities; and (v) the findings of the benchmark Vulnerabilityand
Poverty Assessment study (see Footnote 1, p. 2). It also reflects the Bank's comparative advantage and
complementarity with other donors.
58.
The overarching objective of the Bank's strategy in the Maldives is the reduction of poverty and
regional disparities in access to social and infrastructureservices. To advance this objective, the
strategy, in partnership with other donors, aims at supporting: (i) sustainable economic growth; (ii)
14

improvements in public sector management, including institutional capacity; and (iii) human
development.
Strategic Choice
The Bank supports the Government's national developmentobjectives and strategy. It is a
59.
product of in-country consultations,and addresses the development needs of the island communities. It is
comprehensive in its coverage of the key structural and social areas of development, with a focus on
sustaining broad-basedgrowth and raising the standard of living, particularly in the outer atolls. The
strategy is being supported by a large number of donors. And the Bank will closely coordinate with the
key donors (the ADB, the UNDP, and Japan), so that our analyticaladvisory services and lending
program will complement other donors', strengtheningthe poverty focus of Maldives' development.
Up to now, the Bank has followed a selective, sector-specific,project-by-project approach to
60.
lending and prepared one economic report every four-five years. For the future, the Bank has made a
strategic choice to increase the frequency and scope of our non-lending activities, with emphasis on
institutional capacity building and knowledge transfer, and gradually switch to a "programmatic
approach" in lending,to which the Governmenthas agreed. The Bank considers that the Maldives'
development efforts would be supported more effectively by moving away from the sector specific,
project-by-projectlending to a broad-based support by adopting program lending. The latter will place
IDA lending within a more comprehensive framework and thus facilitate emphasis on all the critical
dimensions of poverty reduction. That relevant framework will be provided by Maldives' Poverty
Reduction Strategy, which the Governmentwill prepare with support from, among others, the ADB and
the Bank. This strategy, which considers public expenditures as a key instrument of economicpolicy and
of the developmentprocess in the Maldives, will enable a better alignment of the Bank's assistance
program with Maldives' key development priorities and with the roles of other donors. Accordingly,the
CAS instruments include: quick-turnaroundpolicy notes for advice/dialogue and for inforrning the
Governmentabout global experiences and best practices; one comprehensive economic report every 3-4
years; technical assistance for institutional capacity building; and lending, supported by close partnerships
and consultationswith the major donors. Annex B9 summarizesthe key elements of the CAS program in
matrix form.
IDA's selectivity in knowledge transfer and lending will be based on the Bank's comparative
61.
advantage and track record in the Maldives. In the medium-term, IDA's analytical/advisoryactivities will
support efforts aimed at capacity building in selective sectors, strengtheningpublic expenditure
management, and the development of Maldives' poverty reduction strategy. This focus will be
complementaryto the ADB's planned poverty assessmentwork and capacity building in public sector
accounts and auditing. In lending, IDA's medium-termemphasis will be on human development, leaving
the other key areas, such as social and physical infrastructure (particularly in the two growth centers), to
the ADB and Japan.
Analytical and advisory activities. As noted earlier, the Maldives will benefit from the
62.
increased frequency and range of our analytical and advisory services. Occasional policy notes are
desirable in that these would facilitate more regular interaction with the Government on current economic
policy matters and enable the Bank to respond to the Government's request 's for policy advice and best
practice examples from around the world. The Bank is planning to rely more on technical assistance,
supported by IDF grants, particularly for institutional capacity building in the Government.
A fisheries sector report will soon be completed. It assesses the sector's key constraints and
63.
policy/regulatoryand institutional issues, and makes specific recommendations to address these. The
findings and recommendations will be used in mapping out a long-term development strategyfor
Maldives' fisheries sector. The latest CEM already provided an assessment of the tourism sector with
specific recommendations. Responding to a request, the Bank is currently helping the Government in the
development of an appropriate legal/regulatory frameworkfor efficient land and housing markets.
15

64.
Public expenditure review (PER) and other supportfor the programmatic approach. In FY01,
the Bank is planning to assist the Government in the preparationof a full PER, which has never been done
for the Maldives. This comprehensive, benchmark PER will serve several purposes. First, it will facilitate
an assessment of inter and intra-sectoralas well as geographicallocations of public expenditures,
focusing on their poverty orientation, rationale, prioritization, and quality. Second, it will help identify
under-funded areas that are critical for poverty reduction and facilitate more effective donor coordination.
Third, the findings of the PER will also serve as basis for determining the level of future IDA lending.
Finally, the PER work itself will serve as a capacity building exercise for the key ministries. Drawing on
the PER's findings with respect to the institutional aspects of budgetary processes as well as on the
findings of the recent CFAA, the Bank plans to support institutionalcapacity building in public
expenditure managementthrough technical assistance (TA). In addition, the support for the formulation
of Maldives' Poverty Reduction Strategy, Bank's planned Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR), as well as ADB's TA programs that are aimed at strengtheningthe Auditor General's Office and
the public accounts system will help prepare the Government for the adoption of a programmatic
approach.
65.
IDA's TA activity would also include support to the Government in the development of an
appropriate legal/regulatory and institutional framework for efficient land-use, housing market
development, and urban development. We intend to continue facilitating the participation of Maldivians
from the Governmentas well as from the non-governmentsectors in the training workshops and seminars
organized by the World Bank Institute (WBI). We will also explore possibilities for supporting the
Maldives in the use of information technology and distance learning with the involvement of the WBI.
66.
Lending. To help the Government prepare for the programmaticapproach, it is proposed that we
gradually move away from the sector-specific,project approach to program lending. For this to happen,
sufficient time needs to be given to the Government to gain further institutional capacity in public
expenditure management with the help of the above cited programs. Accordingly, during this CAS period
(FYO1-FY04),the Bank envisages a project with IDA assistance of around $15-20 million in FY03, with
the sector focus (education or health/nutrition/population)to be determined on the basis of the Maldives'
PRSP and the findings of the forthcoming PER. This program will be based on a sector approach,
underpinned by an analysis of the development needs of the sector, particularly in the outer atolls, and the
role of other donors. The preparation of this operation will depend on continued satisfactory
macroeconomicmanagement.
67.
The proposed programmatic approach will be linked to the benchmarkPER and its annual
updates, which will also serve as instruments of public policy. Bank's support and its level will be
dependent on the consistency of public expenditures with Maldives' development objectives of reducing
poverty and regional disparities and the support of other donors. Preparations for the program lending
support could start in FY03. The envisaged lending support would consist of a series of loans/annual
disbursements,each supporting the annual slice of a high impact, medium-term Government development
program that is also supported by a sound macroeconomicframework.
68.
IFC and MIGA. The IFC committed its first loan in the Maldives in 1996 to support the
expansion of an existing resort in the SouthArn Atoll. In the medium-term, IFC's strategy is to: (i)
support the modernization and expansion of tourism related projects, including the infrastructure and
support services; (ii) promote a deeper financial sector with more product diversification; and (iii) support
initiatives aimed at privatization and viable diversification of economic activities. In line with these areas
of focus, IFC is planning to expand its activities in the Maldives. To this end, it is considering
involvement in other resort expansion projects, and exploring opportunities in the resort air-transfers. IFC
is also supporting an initiative aimed at establishing a leasing company in the Maldives. (The Maldives is
not a member of MIGA).
69.
Collaboration with the IMF. The Maldives is on an annual consultation cycle with the IMF.
The Bank and the IMF cooperate closely within the context of these consultations. The last Article IV
16

Consultation report was discussed by the IMF Board in November 2000. The International Monetary
Fund (IMF) has also extended technical assistance on monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate issues.
VI. MONITORING AND EVALUATION

With regard to macroeconomicmonitoring and updating, IDA will coordinate with the IMF. For
70.
the future,poverty/social monitoring will be another critical activity. The Bank plans to coordinate with
the Governmentand the UNDP to facilitate regularly repeated poverty/vulnerabilitysurveys, building on
the baseline survey carried out for the recent Vulnerabilityand Poverty Assessment study. These followup (smaller) surveys would permit monitoring of changes in poverty status and service delivery in the
atolls, and facilitate monitoring of poverty impacts of public expenditureprograms and of "outcomes" of
our country assistance programs. The results will be useful for the Government, will support donor
coordination, inform our dialogue, and can be used to adjust assistance programs.
Over the next four years, the effectiveness of IDA's assistance to the Maldives will be monitored
71.
and evaluated. The Bank has had a good track record of achievement in Maldives thus far. While IDA's
project assistance in sector specific developmentwill be limited to human development, the Bank will
assist the Governmentto improve institutional capacity in public expenditure management through a
PER, continued policy dialogue, and technical assistance. The government will monitor overall economic
targets, and through collaboration with other developmentpartners, the Bank will support the monitoring
process. In line with its focus--knowledgetransfer through technical and advisory activities, and lending
for human development--the following indicators will be used to monitor the progress of the CAS.
Table 4: Proposed CAS Core Benchmarks
Years

Economic Growth Rate
Transition rate from basic to
secondary schools
Girls gross enrollment ratio in lower
secondary schools
General Malnutrition (weight-for-

2004/05

2000

Country Performance
7.6%
30%

7.0% or higher
50%

51%

71%

45% (in 1997/98)

30% (by 2006)

age) \a

\a This form of malnutrition refers to "weight-for-age", which is different from stunting as given by "height-for-age".

The Bank is planning to monitor CAS progress by conducting another client survey closer to the end of
the CAS period to seek grassroots evaluation of the perception of our assistance in the Maldives. In
addition to the overall targets, the portfolio performance will be monitored to ensure that the Bank
maintains one hundred percent realism and pro-activity targets and zero percent problem projects.
VII.
72.

RISKS

In the Maldives, the principal medium-term risk is external shocks, particularly in the form of

falling tuna prices and tourist arrivals. The key short-termcushion is an adequate reserve level, which the
Maldives has increased to a satisfactory amount in recent years. In addition, the Maldives could expect
continued concessional assistance at sufficientlyhigh levels. In the long-term, these external risks will
remain, though product and market diversification both in tourism and fisheries would enhance Maldives'
structural cushion.
Internally, the limited institutional capacity presents a potential risk for the implementationof
73.
IDA's program. However, IDA's emphasis on supporting capacity building in the public sector, together
with the complementary help by the other key donors, should help mitigate this risk. There is political
stability in the country, and the issues pertaining to regional disparities, particularly in the outer atolls,

17

would be addressed as the development programs are increasinglydirected towards reducing these
disparities and supporting broad-based growth. The Governmenthas increased social sector spending as
part of its development agenda. This will help manage internal risks as well.

James D. Wolfenshon
President
By:
Zhang Shengman

Washington DC
November 15, 2000

18

Attachment I

Development Partners-Assistance

Programs, 2000-2004

Key Development Challenges

Donors

IDA

IFC

ADB

Commitments
(2000-2004)

Protectingthe
Environment

Macroeconomic
Frameworkand Public
SectorManagement

*

* Proposedlendingof
$32.6million. $17.6
mil. already committed
for Education.
* Supportafter FY03to be
determinedby outcome
of PER, PRSP, and role
of other donors.
* Possiblelines of credit
to establishedresortsfor
expansion

*

*

*

* Commitments:$21
millionover 3 years
(2001-03)for projects
* TA support

* TA:Capacity building

Policy adviceon
macroeconomicpolicy,
management
Grants for infrastructure. * Environmental
infrastructure:waterabout$9.5 million
breaks/seawalls
annually
Likelyconcessionalproject
loans: $15 millionover 3-4
years
Likelyconcessionalproject
loans: $15 millionover 3-4
years
Grant-baseddevelopment * Managementof
coastalresources
support
(UNDP)
* Institutional/policy
frameworkfor
environmental
protection(UNDP)
* ProtectedAreas
Grants-basedsupport for
SystemProject
humandevelopmentand
environmentalprotection

Adviceon fiscal,
monetary,and exchange
ratepolicies

for. public accounts
system,good
govemance

Information
technology
development
Post-secondary
education
development
TA

* Outer islands

*

Human resource
development

*

Outer islands
electrification

*

Institute of Health
ScienceProject

*

Regionaldevelopment

*

*

*
IMF
Japan
IDB
Kuwait
Fund
utN
Agencies

AusAid

*

Third Education
and Training
Project - $17.6mil.
FY03 Project in
Human
Development- $15
million.
Distanceleaming

Other Sectoral Issues

BusinessEnvironment

Infrastructure

Human Development

*

electrification
* Regionaldevelopment
(North and South
Growth Centers)

AAA: Policy advice and
dialogue

TA for the establishmentof
a leasing company
Supportfor the
strengtheningof
legal/judicialenviron.

TA for the
establishmentof an
appropriatelegal and
regulatoryframework
for promotingefficient
use of land and the
dcvelopmentof
land/housingmarkets.
* Supportinggrowth in
tourism
*

Infomnationtechnology
development
* TA
*

* Airport upgrading
* Regionalport

development
* Capacitybuilding for

the managementof
development--at
nationaland
atoll/islandlevels

* Promotion of income-

Strengtheningpostsecondarytraining
institutes(UNDP)
* Health/nutrition/po
pulationprograms
(UNFPA,UNICEF.
WHO)
* Tertiary Education
scholarships
*

generatingactivities
(IJNDP)

* Outer atolls health
____________

Denmark
/Danida
__
______

Grants for infrastructure:
about$13 millionfor 4-

5years

project
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~promotion
*

FuahMulaku Hlarbor
DevelopmentProject.

* Ice plants (fisheries)
__I

Annex A2
Page I of 2

Maldives at a glance
Low=rSouth middle.

POVERTY
andSOCIAL
Maldives

Asia

Income

0.28

1,329

2,094

Development
diamond'

1999
Population,mid-year(millions)

GNPper capita(Atlasmethod,USS)
GNP(Atlasmethod,USSbillions)

11950-37

440
581

1,200
2,513

Population(%)
Laborforce(%)

2.8
2.6

1.9
2.3

1.1
1.2

Mostrecentestimate
(latestyearavailable,
1993-99)
Poverty(%of population
belownational
povertyline)
Urbanpopulation(%of totalpopulation)
Lifeexpectancy
at birth(years)
Infantmortality(per1,000livebirths)
Childmalnutrition
(%of childrenunder5)
Accessto improvedwatersource(%of populabon)
age 15+)
Illiteracy(%6
of population
Grossprimaryenrollment(%of school-age
population)
Male

43
28
62
27
45
96
4
98

28
62
75
51
77
46
100
110

43
69
33
15
86
16
114
114

90

116

Life expectancy

Averageannualgrowth,1993-99

.,

Female

GNP
per
capita

Accessto safewater
Maldives
Lower-middle-income
group
..

andLONG-TERM
TRENOS
KEYECONOMIC
RATIOS
1979

1989

1998

1999

|

GDP (USSbillions)

..

0.13

0.38

0.39

|

Exports of goodsand services/GDP

.

349

Grossdomesticsavings/GOP
Grossnationalsavings/GDP

.,

1.
16.4
12.9

Grossdomestic
investment/GDP

Gross
primary
enrollment

IEconomicratlos-

Trade
Ta

-

CurrentaccountbalancelGDP
InterestpaymentslGDP
TotaldebtVGDP
Totaldebtservicelexports
Presentvalueof debt/GDP
Presentvalueof debt/exports

.
..
..

1.4

.

8.3
1.0
52.6
6.3

-6.8
0.8
49.7
3.1

-15.3
0.9
51.6
3.3

1998

1999 1999-03

DomesticInvestment
Savings

Indebtedness
1979-89 1989-99
(averageannualgrowth)
GOP
GNPpercapita

..
..

Exports of goodsand services

._._._._..

7.8

9.1

8.5

6.1

6,2

5.0

1989

1998

73

Maldives

Lower-middle-income
group

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY

1979

Growth
of Investment
andGDP(%)

1999

(%of realGDP)

19

Agriculture &Fisheries
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
.

..
..
..
..

Private consumption

..
..
..

53.4

consumption
Generalgovernment
Imports of goods and services

30.3
88.9

17.6
18.1
6.4
64.5

17.4
18.0
6.6
64.5

a
4

2
9.4

9s

.

97

go

go

99

_GDP

.GD1
..

1998

1999

8.8

6.2
15.3
9.2
8.3

7.5
8.4
10.5
8.9

..

..

197949 1989-99

O

s

Growthof exportsandirnports(%)

(averageannualgrowth)
Agriculture & Fisheries
Industry
Manufacturng
Services

..
..
..
..

Private consumption

..

3.7

11.7
9.4

I

2

..

consumption
Generalgovernment
Grossdomesticinvestment
Imports of goodsand services
Gross nationalproduct

a
94
..
..

..

..

9.2

9.8

9.0

L

-

ss

97

9s

Exports

-

9s

99

mports

estimates.
Note:1999dataare preliminary
in thecountry(inbold)compared
withits income-group
average.
Ifdataaremissing,thediamondwill
Thediamonds
showfourkey indicators
beincomplete.
outflows
Adjustedfor remittance

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Maldives
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1979

1989

1998

1999

27.8

7.2
10.7

-1.4
2.0

3.0
-4.0

Domestic
prices
(% change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator

Inflation(%)
20

15
10

Government
finance
(%of GDP,includescurrentgrants)

s

Current revenue
Currentbudgetbalance
Overallsurplus/deficit

51.9
27.6
-3.3

43.5
10.2
-2.8

46.8
12.9
-4.2

1989

1998

1999

64
35
10

96
56
18

92
39
25

113

354

402

-s
-10

4

95

97

GDPdeflator

9

CPI

0

TRADE
1979
(US$millions)
Total exports (fob)
Marines
Garments
Manufactures
Total imports(cif)

Exportandimportlevels(USSmill)
450,

400

1.
300
200
25-

'

Food
Fuel and
energy
Capital
goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Importprce index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

..

9
..

..

..
..

..

..

(US$ millions)
iSTS
iggg

'1998

il

*

l

200

l

15003

4

90

_

6

79

0

50
0
0

Exports

P

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(USS millions)

1999

Current account balance to GDP I%)

Exportsof goodsandnonfactorservices

42

150

425

442

Importsof goods and non-factorservices
Resource balance

47
-5

140
10

410
15

460
-18 l

Net factor income
Net current transfers

-2

-13
13

-28
-12

-28
-14

-15

Current account balance

11

-26

-60

-20

Financingitems (net)
Changes in net reserves

-8
-2

46
-20

68
-9

7.5

9.0

11.8

11.8

1979

1989

1998

1999

13
0
0

67
0
8

188
0
44

203
0
46

1
0

10
0

14
0

0.0

15
0

0.1

0.4

0.5

1
3
0

16
-1
-4

26
9
7

12

0

0

0

0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

10
0.0
1.0
0.1
0.9

3.9
0.1
3.8
0.3
3.5

3.2
0.2
3.0
0.3
2.7

0

0,
-

-25

-30

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversionrate (DEC,localJUS$)

..

EXTERNAL DEBTand RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD

IDA
Compositionof net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
DevelopmentEconomics

I Campostlon of 1999 debt (US$miII.)

G 27

4

F:30

E:27
D 73
A - IBRD
3 - IDA
C-IMF

E - Bilateral
D- Othermultilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

11/15/00

AnmexB2
Page I of I

CAS Annex B2 - Maldives
Selected Indicators*of Bank Portfolio Performanceand Management
As Of Date10/1712000

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average ImplementationPeriod (years)b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amounta, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

1998

1999

2000

2001

1
3.2
0
0

1
4.2
0
0

1
0.3
0
0

0

0

0

0
39.3

0
74.3

0
91.2

1
0.6
0
0
0
0
13.6

No
98.3
32.8

No
82.8
41.4

No
56.7
28.3

No
64.2
35.6

PortfolioManagement
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources(total US$'000) \h
Average Supervision(US$'000/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj.Eval.by OEDby Number\g
Proj.Eval.by OEDby Amt. (US$millions)
% of OEDProjectsRatedU or HU by Number
% of OEDProjectsRatedU or HU by Amt.

SinceFY80 LastFiveFYs

4
30.7
0
0

3
25.7
0
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance(ARPP) (exceptfor current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on developmentobjectives (DO) and/or implementationprogress(IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursementsduring the year to the undisbursedbalance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginningof the year: Investmentprojects only.
f. Includes $28,000for an ICR completion.

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

g. IndependentOED evaluations.
h. Includes supervisioncosts on projects not included in ARPP project count in Line 1 above.
* All indicatorsare for projects active in the Portfolio,with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, and
supervision,which include all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Maldives
Maldives - IFC and MIGA Program,FY98-01
Category
IFC approvals (US$m)

a

1998

Past
1999

2000

2001

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Sector (%)
Hotels & Tourism
TOTAL
Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equityb
Other
TOTAL
MIGA guarantees(US$m)
MIGA commitments(US$m)

0.00

0.00

0.00

100.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

aExcludesAEF projects.
bIncludes quasi-equitytypes of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary - Maldives

As Of Date 10/17/2000
ProposedIBRD/IDABase-CaseLendingPrograma
FY
2003

ImplementationProjeCtb
Human Development

US$(M)
15.0

Subtotal

15.0

Total, FY 2001 - 2004

15.0

StrategicRewardsbImplementation
b
(HIMIL)
Risks (HIMIL)
H

L

a. This table presentsthe proposedprogramfor the nextthreefiscal years.
b. Foreach project,indicatewhetherthe strategicrewardsand implementationrisks are expectedto be high (H), moderate(M), or low (L).

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1
CAS AnnexB4 - Summaryof NonlendingServices - Maldives
As Of Date 10/1712000
Audience a

Objective

Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Recent completions
Technical Assistance(Grant Supported)

FY98

243

Govt./Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Country Economic Memorandum

FY99

147

Govt./Public/Bank

KG/PS

Country Client Survey

FY00

15

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG

Underway
Fisheries Assessment Study

FYOI

40

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Country Assistance Strategy

FYOI

130

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Country Financial AccountabilityAssessment FYOI

25

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Planned
Public ExpenditureReview

FYO1

148

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Land-Use/HousingSector Reform

FYO1/02

25

Govt./ Donor/Bank

KG/PS

PRSP Support

FY02

100

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS/PD

Public Expenditure Management

FY02

35

Govt./Bank/Donor

KG/PS/PD

Policy Note(s)

FY02

75

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Country ProcurementAssessment Report

FY03

35

Govt./Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Economic Report

FY03

100

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Policy Note

FY03

50

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

PER Update

FY04

70

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

Policy Note(s)

FY04

75

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor

KG/PS

a. Government,Donor, Bank, Public dissemination.
b. KG = Knowledge generation, PD = Public debate,PS = Problem-solving.

Annex B5
Page I of I

Maldives Social Indicators
LatestSingleYear

POPULATION
Totalpopulation,
mid-year(millions)
Growthrate(% annualaverage)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group

1977

1998

0.14
3.2

0.3
2.8

South Lower-middleAsia
income
1,281.3
1.5

2,282.9
0.9

27.0
3.5

42.4
2.2

1,195
112

380
117

1,230
116

0.8
3.0

2.6
5.1

..

5.1
9.7
1.4

27

98

7

96

81

..

.

.

.

84
80

45

81
87
53

93
93
17

47

62

62

69

..

..

..

..

62
63

67
71

77
100

36
44

..

..

..

..

POVERTY
(%of population)
Nationalheadcountindex
Urbanheadcountindex
Ruralheadcount
index
INCOME
GNPper capita(US$)--1999
Consumerpnceindex(1995=100)

..
..

Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index
Lowestquintile(%of incomeor consumption)
Highestquintile(%of incomeor consumption)
SOCIALINDICATORS
Publicexpenditure
Health(%of GDP)
Education(%of GNP)
Socialsecurityandwelfare(%of GDP)
Netprimaryschoolenrollmentrate
(% of agegroup)
Total
Male
Female
Accessto safewater
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

Immunization
rate
(% under 12months)
Measles
DPT
Childmalnutrition
(%under5 years)-general
mal.
Lifeexpectancy
at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female

Mortality
Infant(perthousandlivebirths)
Under5 (perthousandlivebirths)
Adult(15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)

Maternal(per100,000live births)

..
..

121
82

27
39
96

..

..

..

..

..

229

99

219
212

78

200
142

Annex B6
Page I of 1

Maldives: Macro Economic Indicators
...................... Projections .

Actuals

Real GDP growth
Consumer prices

1993

1994

1995

1996

6.2
201

6.6
34

72
55

79
62

1999
1998
1997
Annual percentage change
8.5
9.1
9.1
30
-1.4
7.6

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

7.6
30

76
3.0

7.0
30

7.0
3.0

7.0
3.0

Percent of GDP
Central government budget (percent of GDP)
Revenue and grants
Expenditure & net lending
Overall balance (excluding grants)
Overall balance
Financing
Foreign, net
Domestic, net

386
55.9
-23.8
-17.4

41 0
48.4
-13.2
-7.4

44.1
53.5
-15.6
-9.4

44.2
47.9
-10.6
-3.8

45 7
47.8
-6.3
-2.0

43 5
46 2
-6.5
-2.8

46.8
51.0
-7.5
-4.2

46.0
49.8
-7.2
-3.9

45.4
48.9
-6.5
-3.5

45.2
47.8
-5.2
-2.6

451
47 0
4.3
-1.9

44.6
46.5
-4.0
-1.9

17.4
1.6
15.8

74
3.6
3.8

9.4
9.3
0.1

3.8
4.6
-0.8

2.0
4.3
-2.3

2.8
2.9
-0.1

4.2
0.9
3.3

3.9
2.6
1.3

3.5
2.1
1.4

2.6
2.1
0.5

1.9
15
0.4

1.9
1.5
0.4

11.3

12.2

10.8

9.4

8.1

4.6
2.7

19.8
14.0

187
12.3

15.7
11.3

13.2
9.4

Twelve-monthpercent change at year-end
Money and credit
Total domestic credit
Credit to the private sector (excluding public
enterprise)
Broad money
Velocity (ratio of GDP to broad money)

51 5

14.1

63

-24

8.8

18.6

8.0

55.2
36.3
2.3

30.1
24.2
2.2

26.4
15.6
2.1

9.5
26.0
1.9

38.9
23.1
1.7

257
228
16

4.0
3.6
1.6

In million US$
Balance of payments (million US$)
Exports, f o.b.
Imports, fo.b
Trade balance
Current account
(In percent of GDP)
Overall balance
Reserves (end of year)
Gross official reserves
(In months of imports)
Total external debt (end ofyear stock)
(In percent ofGDP)
Debt service (percent of exports of goods and
nonfactor services)
Memorandumitem:
Nominal GDP (millions ofrufiyaa)
Nominal GDP (millions of USS)

52 7
-177.8
-125.1
-53.8
-24.8%
-15 9

75 4
-195.1
-119.6
-11.1
-4.6%
8.1

85.0
-235 8
-150.8
-18 2
-6.7%
15 3

79.9
-265.5
-185.6
-7.4
-2.5%
43.7

92.5
-307.0
-214.4
-36.5
-10.8%
27.4

95.6
-311.5
-215.9
-25.6
-6 8%
29.1

88.6
-354.1
-265 5
-60.0
-15.3%
-7.3

88.2
-372.0
-283.8
-57.4
-13.2%
-16.1

90.7
-386.8
-296.2
42.8
-8.9%
-2.7

96.8
-413.9
-317.1
-38.6
-7.3%
7.7

103.4
-447.0
-343.7
-38.1
-6.5%
5.8

110.5
-482.8
-372.3
-37.4
-5.8%
7.1

26.5
1.8

32.0
2.0

49.3
2.5

77.6
3.5

99.7
3.9

119.9
46

128.5
4.4

124.4
4.0

121.7
3.8

129.4
3.8

135.2
3.6

142.3
3.5

130.7
60.2

142.0
590

172.2
63.4

177.2
58.8

169.1
49.9

187.7
49.8

202.8
51.6

236.6
54.3

261.7
54.2

290.5
54.6

317.0
54.1

344.0
53.2

3.9

3.5

3.4

3.2

6.9

3.2

3.4

37

4.0

4.1

4.1

4.1

2,380
217.3

2,790
240.8

3,195
271.5

3,550
301.6

3,990
339.0

4,440
377.2

4,625
392.9

5,125
435.4

5,680
482.6

6,260
531.8

6,899
586.2

7,603
646.0

Includes re-e.xports
Source: Data provided by the Maldivian authorities, and IMF staff estrnsatesandprojection

Annex B7
Page I of 1

Maldives - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (USSm)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

Actual
1996
1995

1994

Estimate
1998

1997

Projected
2001
2000

1999

2002

142

172

177

169

188

203

237

262

291

8

25

17

13

15

6

11

14

11

10

11

12

28

14

15

18

20

23

51.3

53.4

47.3

41.2

43.3

44.9

49.0

50.4

51.6

59.0
3.4
79.6

63.4
3.3
81.6

58.8
3.1
81.3

49.9
6.8
84.4

49.8
3.1
79.6

51.6
3.3

54.3
3.6

54.3
3.9

54.7
4.1

0
23.7

0
22.6

0
23.3

0
10.0

0
22.9

0

0

0

0

..

..

..

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/publicDS
Preferred creditor DS/public

..

..

DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)c
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)c

..

..

..

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
32

0
36.1

0
37.3

0
39.0

0
44.1

0
45.6

0
44.6

0
46.9

0
48.5

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /d

0
0

0
0

6.0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 of2

CAS Annex B8 - Maldives
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As Of Date1011712000
Closed Projects = 6
Active Proiects
Last PSR
Supervision Rating bl
Project ID

Project Name

P055944

III EDUC & TRAIN.

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA):
of which has been repaid:
Total now held by IBRD and IDA:
Amount sold:
of which repaid:
Total Undisbursed:

Development

Obiectives

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation Fiscal Year

Progiress

S

S

Active Loans
2.3
0.0
17.6
0.0
0.0
14.2

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

IBRD

IDA

GE

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Rev'd

0

17.6

0

0

14.4

-2.3

0

2000

Closed Loans
46.7
1.2
43.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

Total
49.0
1.2
61.1
0.0
0.0
14.2

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Maldives
Maldives
Statementof IFC's
Held and DisbursedPortfolio
As of 8/31/00
(In US DollarsMillions)
Held
FY Approval Company
1996 Villa Shipping
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Loan
3.6

Equity
0

Quasi
0

Partic
0

Loan
3.6

Equity
0

Quasi
0

Partic
0

3.6

0

0

0

3.6

0

0

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan
0

Equity
0

Quasi
0

Partic
0

Annex B9
Page I of 3

Maldives-Country
Diagnosis

Development

Overall Strategy/Actions

Program

Matrix

(FYOI-FY04)
Bank Group's assistance

Progress Indicators

Other donors

Objectives_

ProtectingMaldives'
invaluable
environment,
particularlycoralreefs
and coasts,which are
the fragilebasis of the
country'ssuccessas a
vacationresortand the
homeof themarine life
that supportsits

Coral reefs and coastsare under
increasingstress from coral/sand
mining, coastalerosion,increasing
volumeof untreatedsewageand solid
waste disposal.

the Environment
I. Protecting
*
Access to environmentallysound sanitation
Developcommunity-basedsolutionsfor
and safedrinkingwater increased
effectivecoastalresourcemanagement;
Improvedsolid wastedisposal.
*
addresswater-sewerageand solid waste
disposalproblemsof the islands:
strengtheninstitutionalcapacityto
monitorand enforceenvironmental
guidelines.

*
*

AAA: policy dialogue
AAA: FisheriesSector
DevelopmentAssessmentStudy
(to be finalizedin FY01)

UNDP,GEF.
AusAid

*

AAA: Public Expenditure
Review (PER)
AAAA:
supportthe Govemment.
in coordinationwith ADB, in the
preparationof Poverty
ReductionStrategyPaper
(PRSP)
TA (IDF supported):technical
assistancefor strengthening
institutionalcapacityin public
expendituremanagemenit.
AAA FisheriesSector
DevelopmentAssessmentStudy
AAA:policy dialoguein
collaborationwith IMF.

ADB,IMF.
UNDP)

fisheies.

Strengthenpublic
sectormanagementand
to enhance
goverimance
developmentimpactof
publicsector
expenditureprograms,
and facilitatefurther
privatesector
development.

Promotebroadlysharedgrowth:reduce
incomepovertyand
regionaldisparitiesin
accessto social and
physicalinfrastructure

and Public Sector Management
Framework
Macroeconomic
IL. Strengthening
*
Introducea three-yearrolling public
a simple,
Developand implemnent
*
Narrowtax base; vulnerability
expenditureprogramwithinthe context of a
basic tax systemto broadenthe tax
to revenue falls.
medium-termbudgetaryframework,
base beyond customsdutiesand the
*
Institutionalcapacitylimitatiois
preferablyformulatedas a well-prioritized
tourism tax.
in the developmentand
and futly funded'-core"expenditure
*
Strengthenthe institutionalcapacity
implementationof sectoral
program.
of the key ministriesto formulate
developmentprograms,and in
Developmediumand long-term strategies
*
sectoralstrategiesand to prepare
expendituremanagement.
for the key sectorsand formulateconsistent,
(identify,appraise, and prioritize)
State-ownedenterprises(SOEs)
*
high impactsectoralpublicexpeniditure
expenditureprogramsin line with
dominatemanycommercial
programs.
the nationaldevelopmentpriorities,
activities,some benefitingfrom
*
Developwell prioritizedpublic expenditure
(in view of the scarcityof qualified
monopolisticprivilegesand
programsthat are consistentwith sectoral
staff with expertise,it might be
others showing
strategiesand with the objectiveof reducing
prudent to developa central
thus
inefficiencies/losses,
poverty and regionaldisparities;reversethe
"projects developmentunit").
burdeningtheeconomyand the
upwardtrend ii the generalservicesoutlays
*
EliminateSOE monopoliesin
budget.
to restraintthe growth of low priority
comniercialactivities,and gradually
current expendituresand allocatesufficient
withdrawSOE involvementfrom
resourcesfor social sectorand infrastructure
activitiesthat can be left to the
recurrentexpenditures.
private sector.
Strengthenthe publicaccounts
*
system.
*
Continueeffortsaimed at
institutionalcapacitybuildingat the
key agencies such as the Audit
Office, MaldivesMonetary
Authority,the StatisticsSectionof
Increasedemphasison atolls/islands
*
the Ministryof Planningand
developmentto reducepoverty and
National Development.
*
Higherincidenceof income
disparitiesin access to social servicesand
to
povertyand disparitiesin access
infrastructurein theouter atolls;
socialservicesand infrastructurein
the outer atolls.
strengthenedmicro-creditprogramsfor
incomcgeneratingactivities.
*
Improvementsin socialleconomicindicators
*

*

*

*
*

*

*

Supportthe Government,jointly
and other donors,in
with UTNDP
carryingout regular(smaller)
householdsurveys,using the
1997/98survey as a benchmark,
with a view to using the
informationfor poverty
monitoringand public
expenditureimpactassessment.
LEN:Programlendingto be
initiatedin FY04

ADB, IDB,
UNDP,IFAD,
Japait, Kuwait
Fund

Annex B9
Page 2 of 3
Development
Objectives
by pursuingbroadbasedgrowth through
intensifiedefforts
aimed at atoll/island
development.

Overall Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

Progress Indicators

Bank Group's assistance

Other donors

(e.g.,per capita averageincomes,accessto
secondaryeducation;reductionmalnutrition
amongchildrenaged 1-5).

III. Strengthenin Human Development
A. Education.Improve *
the qualityof and
accessto education,
particularlyin the outer
atolls; enhanceskill
levels of Maldivians.

Low quality and limitedaccess
to secondaryschool,particularly
in the outer atolls; inadequate
resourcesfor educationin the
atolls/islands;high costof
educationservices;low leaming
attainmentand achievement
levels;low curricularrelevance
and inadequateassessment
practices.

*
B. Health nutrition
and povulation.
Improvethecoverage,
quality,effectiveness,
efficiency,and
sustainabilityof health,
nutrition and
populationservices.

A high under 5 mortalityrate for
a countrywith its level of
development;stubbomlyhigh
fertilityrates due to low
contraceptiveprevalence;and
high levels of malnutrition
amongchildren.

Improveenvironment
for privatesector
development;promote
the developmentof
small and medium
enterprises.

Institutional,policy-induced
weaknessesin the business
environment.

*

*

Universalizeprimaryeducationby
2000; expandaccessto lower and
upper secondarylevel education;
enhancethe relevanceof education;
increasethe supplyof skilled
manpower;continuesupporting
tertiarylevel education/training
abroadthroughthescholarship
program;enhanceteachertraining;
improvecurriculumand assessment
practices;strengthenthe postsecondarytraining/vocational
institutes.

a

Improveaccess,particularlyfor
peopleliving in the atolls,to high
quality,publiclyprovidedbasic
healthcare services,including
interventionsaimedat reducingthe
burdenof communicablediseases,
decreasingmalnutrition,and
providingcompletereproductive
healthservices(includingfamily
planning).

*

*

By 2005 increasetransitionfrom primaryto
secondaryschoolfrom 30% to 50%;
provideaccessto secondaryschoolin 4
additionalatolls;doubleenrolmentat lower
secondaryand tripleenrollmentat upper
secondaryschool;increasesupplyof
trained/skilledmanpowerthroughincountryand intemationalprograms.

*

AAA: policydialogue.

*

LEN:ThirdEducationand
TrainingProject (approvedby
the Board on March16, 2000).

By 2006 reduceunder5 mortalityrates to
25 per 1.000livebirths:increasemodem
contraceptionprevalencerateto 40%;and
reduceseveremalnutritionrate (weightfor
age) from45% to 30%/6.
By 2006 increaseimmunizationand
prcnatalcare coverageto 90% overall,and
at least 85% in the atolls;introducenew
vaccinesand ensurethat 80% of children
live in areaswith activenutritionprograms;
access to, and knowledgeof, modem
contraceptivemethodsbecomeuniversal.

*

AAA: policydialogue.
AAA: a benchmarkPER, and
annualPER updates.

*

*

LEN: a stand-aloneprojectin
FY03 to be followedby program
lending.

*

AAA: policydialogue/policy
notes.
IFC: ongoingadvisory
consultationsfor the
establishmentof a leasing
company.

ADB, IDB,
AusAid,DFID
(UK)

UNDP,WHO,
UNICEF,
UNFPA,
AusAID

IV. Improving Business Environment

Deepen and strengthen
the financialsector.

*

*

A bankingsectorthat is
inadequatefor meetingthe
growing financialneedsof the
economy.

*

*

Improvethe commercial
legal/regulatoryenvironmentand
strengthenthejudicialsystem;
reformthe SOE sector.

*

Fosterthe developmentof private
banks;developsourcesof long-term
financing;encourageincomeearning
activitiesand the developmentof
smallenterprises.

*

*

Attractintemationallyreputableprivate
banks; promotegoodaccountingand
auditingpractices.
Removethe monopolyprivilegesof SOEs;
establisha regulatoryagency.
Strengthenmicro-financeschemes.

*

ADB,IMF

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3
Overall Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

Development
Objectives

Bank Group's assistance

Progress Indicators

Other donors

V. Key Sectoral Issues and Priorities
Ensuresustainable
growthof tourismand
fisheries.

*

*
*

*
Developan efficient
land tenuresystem,
housing
market/delivery,
housingfinance,and
an urbandevelopment
policy;clarifyproperty
and access rights.

*

Scopefor enhancingthe private
sector'sparticipationin the
formulationof tourismsector
developmentstrategy.
Limitediong-termfinance.
MIFCO's(fisheriessectorSOE)
monopolyoverprocessingand
export of cannedand frozenfish
is a constrainton thepace of
privatesectorexpansionand
diversificationin the sector.
Over-fishingof somerecf
fisheries.
Absence of clearlydefined
property/accessrightsin thecase
of land;severe housingproblem
in Male and on a fewother
islands.

*
*

*
*

Developconditionsand suitable
institutionsfor long-termfinance.
RemoveMIFCO's monopoliesand
improve its efficiencyand financial
performance,whileacceptingthe
privatizationof its commercial
activitiesas a strategicobjective.
Removedistortionary
(administrativelyfixed) tuna
procurementpricingpolicy.
Developa suitablefisheriesresource
managementregime(FRMR).

*
*

Increasedprivatesector activityin fisheries.
Gradualintroductionof a broadFRMRand
of a community-basedreef fisheries
managementpolicy.

*

Eliminationof MIFCO's monopolyover
processingand export of cannedand frozen
tuna

*
*

*

*

*

Establisha legal/regulatory
frameworkfor the developmentof
an efficient landtenure system,with
a viewto promotingefficientuse of
landand the developmentof housing
and housing financemarkets.

AAA: Policy dialogue
IFC: ongoing advisory
consultationsfor the
establishmentof a leasing
company;lendingto resort
developers.
AAA: FisheriesSector
DevelopmentAssessmentStudy

TA-- technicalassistancefor:
developingappropriate
legal/regulatoryframeworkfor
land use and housing;
strengtheninginstitutional
capacity in the publicsectorto
deal with the housing/urban
developmentissues and develop
shelter strategy.

ADB, IMF,
UNDP

Annex B IO
Page 1 of I

Maldives- CAS Summaryof DevelopmentPriorities
Country
Network area

Major issue'

performancea

Country

Bank

Reconciliation

priorityC

priorityc

of country and
Bank priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction
Economic policy
Public sector
Gender

Good
Fair
Fair
Good

Outer Atolls poverty
SOE
Resource Mobilization
Income earning opportunities

H
M
H
H

H
H
H
H

--

Human Development
Education
Health, nutrition & population
Social protection

Good
Fair
Poor

Quality access in the Atolls
Malnutrition, high population
Inadequatesocial security system

H
H
H

H
H
L

--

Environmentally& Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development

Fair
Good
Fair

Access to social and infra. services
Swage and solid waste disposal
Higher cost of social services

H
M
H

H
H
H

Rudimentary financial sector
Business environment

H
H

H
H

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Poor
Private sector
Good
Energy & mining

---

Infrastructure

Good

---

Expanding infrastructure costly

----

--

Other donors cover

--

Ongoing dialogue
--

---

-----

M

L

Other donor cover

a. Use"excellent,""good,"'fair,"or"poor."
b. Indicateprincipalcountry-specific
problems(e.g.,for povertyreduction,"ruralpoverty;'for education,"femalesecondarycompletion;"
for environment,"urbanair pollution").
c. To indicatepriority,use'low,""moderate,"or "high."
d. Giveexplanation,if prioritiesdo not agree;for example,anotherMDBmay havethe leadon the issue,or there maybe ongoingdialogue.

