Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No.31758-LA

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

THE LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (LAO PDR)

Public Disclosure Authorized

March 10, 2005

Southeast Asia Country Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of March 1,2005)
Currency unit = Kip
US$1= 10,345
FISCAL YEAR
October 1 - September 30
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
ADP
AFD
AFTA
AML
ASEAN
CAS
CEM
CFAA
CIDA
CPAR
CPI
CPIA
CPPR
DSA
EdL
EIB
ESW
EU
FDI
FMAC
FIAS
FMCBC
GDP
GEF
GMS
GPAR
HIPC
ICA
ICR
IDA
IDF
IFAD
IFC
IMF
JICA
JSAN
JSDF
KRLP
LBF
LDC
LECS
LEnS
LPRP
MBO
MCTPC

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Agricultural Development Project
Agence Franqaise de Dtveloppement
ASEAN Free Trade Area
Anti-Money Laundering
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Canadian Intemational Development Agency
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Committee for Planning and Investment
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Electricite du Laos
European Investment Bank
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Management Adjustment Credit
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Management Capacity Building Credit
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Greater Mekong Sub-region
Govemance and Public Administration Reform
Program
Highly Indebted Poor Country
Investment Climate Assessment
Implementation Completion Report
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
Intemational Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Japan Intemational Cooperation Agency
Joint Staff Advisory Note
Japan Social Development Fund
Khammouane Rural Livelihoods Project
Lao Business Forum
Least Developed Country
Lao PDR Expenditure and Consumption Survey
Lao Environment and Social Project
Lao People’s Revolutionary Party
Mass-based Organizations
Ministry of Communications, Transport, Post and
Construction

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team:

MDG
MIH
M&E
MFA
MIGA
MOF
MPDF
MRC
MTEF
NGO
NGPES
NIB
NOSPA
NPV
NT2
NTR
NTSEP
ODA
PBA
PDR
PEMSP
PER
PETS
PFM
PHRD
PIU
PRF
PRG
PRGF
PRSC
PRSP
PSD
RMP
SEDP
SIDA
SME
SOE
SPRE
STEA
SWAp
UN
UNCDF
UNDP

uxo

WBI
WTO

Millennium Development Goals
Ministry of Industry and Handicrafts
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multifibre Arrangement
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Finance
Mekong Private Sector Development Facility
Mekong River Commission
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Nongovernmental Organization
National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy
Nordic Investment Bank
National Organization for the Study of Policy and
Administration
Net Present Value
Nam Theun I1
Normal Trade Relations
Nam Theun Social and Environment Project
Official Development Assistance
Performance Based Allocation
People’s Democratic Republic
Public Expenditure Management Strengthening
Program
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
Public Financial Management
Policy and Human Resources Development
Project Implementation Unit
Poverty Reduction Fund
Partial hsk Guarantee
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Road MaintenanceProgram
Socio-Economic Development Plan
Swedish Intemational Development Agency
Small and Medium Enterprise
State-Owned Enterprise
Southem Provinces Rural Electrification
Science, Technology and Environment Agency
Sector-Wide Approach
United Nations
UN Capital Development Fund
United Nations Development Program
Unexploded Ordnance
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

World Bank
Jemal-ud-din Kassum
Ian C. Porter
Enrique Crousillat, Lynne Sherbume-Benz, Zafar Ahmed,
Ragini Dalal, Christopher Finch, Alessandro Magnoli,
Deborah Newitter Mikesell

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................
i
I.
COUNTRY CONTEXT,. .........,.................,............,............,.................................. 1
A. Political Context................................................................................................ 1
B. Economic Transition and Strong Growth ......................................................... 2
C. Poverty Reduction and Social Development .................................................... 5
D. Governance Issues ............................................................................................ 7
E. Capacity ............................................................................................................
8
L A O PDR’s DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND CHALLENGES ....................
9
11.
A. Country Vision ..................................................................................................
9
B. Key Development Challenges......................................................................... 10
C. Medium-term Economic Outlook ................................................................... 12
D. External Debt ..................................................................................................
14
THE WORLD BANK IN LAO PDR: LESSONS OF EXPERIENCE ................15
111.
WORLD B A N K GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ......................................
20
IV.
A. Selectivity and Approach ................................................................................ 20
B. World Bank Group CAS Objectives and Activities ....................................... 21
C. World Bank Assistance Program .................................................................... 38
D. Portfolio Management .................................................................................... 43
E. Scenarios and Triggers .................................................................................... 44
F. Monitoring CAS Implementation ......................... .......................................... 46
V.
MANAGING RISKS ............................................................................................ 47
VI.
CONCLUDING REMARKS ................................................................................ 49
Text Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:

Table 6:
Table 7:
Table 8:
Table 9:
Table 10:

Poverty Headcount (1992/93-2002/03)
Lao PDR: Social Indicators, 1990 and Latest Available Year
Base Economic Projections
Strengthen Management o f Key Drivers of Future Growth
Strengthen Public Financial Management, Service Delivery, and
Targeted Poverty Programs
Strengthen Key Capacities and Partnerships
Support Implementation of N T 2
Proposed Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA)
Proposed Indicative Assistance Program: Base Case
CAS Triggers

Text Figures
Figure 1:
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Figure 4:

Economic Performance
Progress Towards MDGs, Selected Indicators
L a o PDR’s CPIA in comparison with IDA Averages
Evolution of Lao PDR PRSCs

This document has a restricted d i s t r i b u t i o n and may be used by recipients o d y in
the performance o f their official duties, I t s contents may n o t be otherwise disclosed

w i t h o u t W o r l d B a n k authorization.

Text Boxes
B o x 1:
B o x 2.
B o x 3:
B o x 4:
B o x 5:
B o x 6:
B o x 7:
B o x 8:

Sources o f Growth
Summary o f Baseline Debt Service Burden Indicators
Findings from Different Evaluations
N a m Theun 2 (NT2) Hydropower Project as a Driver of Change
The Road Maintenance Program - A Success Story
Major Donor Activities
Implementation o f Lao PDR N a m Theun 2 Project: Multilateral and Bilateral
Partnership
I F C in Lao PDR

Attachments
Attachment 1:
Attachment 2:
Attachment 3:
Attachment 4:
Attachment 5:

Lao PDR CAS Results Matrix
Capacity Development
Debt Sustainability Analysis
NGPES - CAS Priorities and Donor Activities
Environmental Sustainability in Lao PDR

Standard CAS Annexes
Lao PDR at a Glance
Annex A2:
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
I F C and MIGA Program
Summary o f Nonlending Services
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Social Indicators
Annex B6:
Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7:
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Annex B8:
Statement o f IFC’s Portfolio
CAS Summary o f Development Priorities
Annex B 10:
M a p (IBRD 3343 1)

. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Country Context

i.
Lao PDR has undertaken significant reforms to move from a command to a market economy
and these reforms have helped stimulate growth and reduce poverty. Growth has averaged 6 percent
per year between 1991 and 2003 and the incidence o f poverty has fallen from 46 percent in 1992 to
33 percent in 2003. The stabilization program introduced in the late 1990s has also reduced inflation
to single digits. However, the Government’s fiscal position has continued to remain fragile and the
medium-term debt service i s only manageable provided economic reforms are maintained.
ii.
Sustaining growth and ensuring that the various sectors can accelerate productivity and
benefit from linkages to dynamic regional markets w i l l require further liberalization of the trade
regime, improvements in other aspects o f the business environment, improvements in infrastructure,
and better management o f forestry, hydro, and mining resources. Sustaining growth w i l l also require
significant governance reforms. Lao PDR governance indicators stand below regional and global
averages; and while some progress has been made in improving public expenditure management,
overall public administration reform has proved much more difficult to implement than the first
wave o f economic reforms. Capacity constraints also continue to be a significant challenge.

iii.
Lao PDR i s on track to meet the poverty Millennium Development Goal (MDG) b y 2015,
but w i l l have difficulty in achieving many o f the other MDGs. Social indicators for health and
education, maternal and child mortality, and access to an improved water source are particularly low.
The safety net system in Lao PDR i s underdeveloped and vulnerable groups, such as upland
communities and ethnic minorities, are especially susceptible. Bold, innovative steps w i l l have to be
taken to truly improve social outcomes and reduce vulnerability, including improving the access,
targeting and efficiency o f service delivery, developing adequate pay and employment policies in the
social sectors, exploring alternative options for service delivery to remote communities, and taking
an integrated approach to improving upland rural livelihoods.
The National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy

iv.
In i t s National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy (NGPES-2004), the Government
proposes to raise annual growth to 6-7 percent and to eradicate mass poverty b y 2010. Developed
with an unprecedented level o f consultation and participation, the NGPES stresses the Government’s
commitment to sound macroeconomic policies to sustain growth, and prudent monetary and fiscal
policies combined with structural reforms. T o convert sustained growth into improved social
outcomes, the NGPES also recognizes that strengthened public sector management and capacity
development will be critical, as w i l l better service delivery, and better management o f natural
resources and the environment.
Recalibrated World Bank Assistance Strategy

v.
Dialogue and engagement between Lao PDR and the World Bank have strengthened since
the last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), catalyzed b y the NGPES, the N a m Theun 2 hydropower
project and government interest in regional integration. The present CAS has been designed to
support the NGPES and within this framework, key drivers o f future growth as well as better
targeting o f social outcomes and reductions in vulnerability. The World Bank’s analytical and
advisory activities (AAA) program and Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) framework w i l l
provide strategic support for strengthening the dialogue on the reform agenda. The World Bank has
recalibrated i t s approach for this new CAS, incorporating a stronger emphasis on building capacity.
World Bank assistance w i l l focus within each CAS objective on supporting identification,

prioritization, and removal of key capacity constraints to achieving poverty reduction and economic
and social development goals. The CAS also incorporates a stronger emphasis on partnerships,
including developing a consensus among donors and the Government on critical reform issues and
how best to address them.
C A S Objectives and Outcomes

World Bank assistance w i l l support the implementation o f the NGPES in two substantive
vi.
priority areas:
0

0

C A S Objective 1: Sustain growth through improved management o f key drivers-regional
integration and private sector development, rural development, and natural resource
management.
Expected Outcomes: Strengthened regional integration and private sector development
strengthened institutional capacity to support rural development and agricultural
productivity; and improved policies and institutional capacities to support more sustainable
and participatory management and conservation o f natural resources.
C A S Objective 2: Improve social outcomes and reduce vulnerability through strengthened
public financial management and service delivery capacities and targeted poverty reduction
programs.
Expected Outcomes: Strengthened public financial management capacities; improved
access to and quality of basic health and education services, with an emphasis on vulnerable
groups; and improved approaches to reducing poverty o f the most vulnerable.

These objectives are complemented b y two additional CAS objectives that capture key elements o f
the approach that the World Bank w i l l use to support these substantive priorities:
0

0

C A S Objective 3: Adopt a strategic approach to capacity development and partnerships in
support o f better NGPES results.
Expected Outcomes: Strengthened capacities o f the Committee for Planning and
Investment, the Ministry o f Finance, and line ministries to plan, coordinate, and monitor
NGPES implementation; strengthened key sectoral and provincial capacities in support o f
CAS objectives; strengthened capacities o f local partner institutions to support capacity
development activities; and strengthened donor partnerships for better results.
C A S Objective 4: Support implementation o f N a m Theun 2 (NT2) as an example o f an areabased, sustainable natural resource development program that contributes to growth, social
outcomes, capacity development, and stronger partnerships.
Expected Outcomes: Sustained economic growth, including greater regional integration and
more sustainable natural resource management; N T 2 mechanisms are put in place to ensure
that expected revenues contribute to increases in spending on priority poverty reduction and
environmental protection programs, and ultimately to strengthened service delivery and
improved social outcomes; N T 2 contributes to improved management capacity, coordination
and participation, and monitoring; and NT2 involves continued and regular consultation with
local communities as well as effective partnerships among all concerned stakeholders.

vii.
The World Bank w i l l take an integrated approach to the CAS b y combining various
instruments, with a particular emphasis on strategic and participatory AAA. A series o f PRSCs w i l l
support critical public sector reforms to strengthen accountability and efficiency o f public
expenditure management, and improve allocation o f public resources to pro-poor development
priorities. Investment operations in selected sectors to support NGPES priorities, and in collaboration
with other donors, w i l l complement International Finance Corporation (IFC) and Multilateral

Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) support to private sector development and w i l l emphasize
sector-wide approaches (SWAps) where appropriate. During the first years o f the CAS period,
International Development Association (IDA) lending/grants w i l l focus on key operations to support
the N T 2 development framework and associated social and environmental measures. The World
Bank w i l l also continue to work closely with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on issues o f
macro-economic management and monitoring.
viii.
The base case IDA allocation currently provides an indicative allocation o f US$128 million
over the four year period o f the CAS. Given Lao PDR’s low income and high debt burden, i t i s
expected that the majority o f IDA resources w i l l be available as grants. A low case scenario,
characterized b y a weak macroeconomic stance, slow pace or serious backtracking on the reform
agenda and implementation o f the poverty reduction strategy, or a poorly performing portfolio would
provide only US$40-60 million and would not include subsequent PRSCs. If there i s substantive
non-compliance in the N T 2 project, including non-compliance with safeguard and revenue
management undertakings, the World Bank would consider even further curtailing lending levels,
including the option o f not engaging in future financing andor suspension o f the entire portfolio,
until i t i s satisfied that agreements are being met and there i s adherence to commitments. If the pace
o f reforms and implementation accelerates and significant additional key policy changes are
undertaken, it would be expected that the Performance-based Allocation (PBA) exercise could push
L a o PDR into a high case lending scenario o f about 30 percent more IDA allocation than the base
case. These additional resources would be provided mainly through modulated PRSC amounts in
support of policy and institutional reforms, or through one or two additional investment operations.
ix.
Although IDA resources allocated to Lao PDR are small relative to overall donor support,
the World Bank remains a lead agency in supporting Lao PDR’s development objectives and policy
agenda. The World Bank i s making special efforts to work collaboratively with other donors to align
programs around common frameworks and strategies. The World Bank w i l l participate actively in
newly expanded aid coordination and sector dialogue mechanisms and promote harmonization of
project implementation processes.
Risks

x.
CAS implementation and results are subject to multiple risks, which fall under four
categories: risks arising from the potential for fluctuating political commitment or weaker political
w i l l on reforms after N T 2 i s approved, as well as weak implementation capacity; risks arising from
lack o f performance under the N T 2 Project; risks relating to the effectiveness o f support extended to
the country by i t s external development partners, including the World Bank; and risks arising from
external factors over which the Government has no control. The management o f these r i s k s w i l l
determine the pace and direction of future policy reforms under NGPES as well as implementation
performance on the N T 2 project. The proposed CAS scenarios and IDA programs are designed to
address these issues, including cases o f slower or faster reforms and modulating levels o f IDA
support.
Suggested Items for Board Consideration

Board members may wish to discuss, among others, the following aspects o f this CAS:

xi.
0
0

0
0

Does the CAS adequately support the Government’s NGPES?
I s the proposed approach to capacity development and partnerships appropriate?
I s the proposed approach o f combining PRSCs and selected investment lending appropriate?
Are the proposed triggers realistic and do they reflect the potential r i s k s ?

LAO PDR -- COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
1.
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (PDR)
covering the period FY1999-FY2002 was discussed by the World Bank‘s Board of Directors in April
1999 (Report No. 19098-LA). Presentation o f this follow-on CAS was delayed so that it could be aligned
w i t h the Lao PDR Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), the National Growth and Poverty
Eradication Strategy (NGPES), which was discussed by the Board o f Directors in December 2004.
The preparation o f the new CAS in Lao PDR has been subject to extensive consultations with the
2.
Government, donors, and other stakeholders. The consultations began in early 2003 with government
representatives, mass-based organizations (MBO), the private sector, and provincial authorities to solicit
feedback and strategic inputs. Formal consultations with the Government have been progressive with
three inter-ministerial consultations over the last two years. Consultations with other stakeholders
including bilateral donors and multilateral organizations continued in 2004, which further strengthened
efforts to harmonize assistance among development partners.

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

3.
Lao PDR is a small, sparsely populated, landlocked country with extensive natural resources.
With a population estimated at 5.7 million in 2004, and growing at a relatively rapid rate o f 2.6 percent
annually, Lao PDR i s characterized by a rich cultural and ethnic diversity where almost half o f the
population belongs to minority groups concentrated in the upland areas. Covering an area o f 236,800
square km in the center of the dynamic Mekong region, Lao PDR shares borders with Thailand, Vietnam,
China, Cambodia, and Myanmar. Although infrastructure-roads, telecom, water and electricity-is
underdeveloped, the country i s rich in water resources, tropical forests and minerals. A large majority o f
the population relies for i t s livelihood on agriculture, which accounts for over half o f GDP. Urbanization
i s relatively low, at 25 percent. Gross National Income (GNI) per capita stands at around US$340.
Reliance on external support to the budget remains high, and donor-funded programs account for nearly
40 percent o f total public expenditures.

A.

POLITICAL CONTEXT

4.
Lao PDR has maintained a single-party system, similar to China and Vietnam. The Lao PDR
People’s Revolutionary Party (LPRP) i s headed by the Party’s Central Committee comprising 53
members elected at the Seventh Party Congress in 2001. The structure o f political power remains
unchanged since 1975, with a top down decision making process that i s often opaque to outsiders. A
relatively small group o f Politburo members makes key decisions within the Party and has considerable
influence on the Government. While seven out o f ten members o f the Politburo are current or past
military members, the next Party Congress to be held in early 2006 may mark a generation change as
several older and conservative members would leave their place to the next generation. The National
Assembly, whose members are elected directly b y the people from a l i s t o f Party candidates as well as
some independent candidates, i s increasingly playing a stronger oversight role. In the provinces,
governments have a high degree o f autonomy over resources, expenditures, and services. Although there
are signals that a political transition i s slowly beginning, as reflected in the gradual process o f
decentralization o f decision making, as well as a greater openness in internal processes and a substantial
improvement in the dialogue with donors, i t i s likely that efforts to accelerate the pace o f economic
reform w i l l s t i l l be constrained by the inertia o f the political culture.

5.
Civil society has a limited but slowly expanding role. International NGOs have been present in
Lao PDR for some time. Several international NGOs support knowledge sharing and networking with
local civil society groups and a few local independent associations have been formed recently, including
education support groups, economic and development support organizations and religious associations.
Interest groups (i.e., women, youth, labor, ethnic groups) are formally represented b y MBOs linked to the
Party. Social accountability i s weak, but there i s potential for MBOs to represent constituents in bottomup policy formulation and decision-making. Although the local media i s owned fully b y the state, there i s
open access to foreign media and the internet.

B.

ECONOMICTRANSITIONAND STRONG GROWTH

6.
Lao PDR has undertaken significant economic reforms to move from a command economy
towards a market economy. When Lao PDR was established in 1975, a policy o f “accelerated
socialization” was pursued, including extensive agricultural collectivization. However, b y 1982, the use
of “market forces” was promoted at the Third Congress of the LPRP and, though halting at times, there
has been significant progress towards this goal. In 1986, the Government officially abandoned the central
planning system and introduced the New Economic Mechanism. Important steps were taken, such as near
total price liberalization and exchange rate unification, the removal o f the Government’s trade monopoly,
and the opening up o f foreign and inter-provincial trade. Private firms were allowed to enter the market
and family farms were encouraged over collectives. The private sector began to emerge and the number
o f State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) was reduced b y 75 percent.

7.
During the 1990s, structural reforms continued more slowly and intermittently with major
setbacks resulting from the economic crisis at the end of the decade. In 1991, the loss o f Official
Development Assistance (ODA) following the collapse of the Soviet Union stimulated a re-orientation
towards Asian and western markets. The Government continued structural reforms in the first half of this
period, including further efforts in the banking and SOE sectors, but these and other reforms were only
partially implemented. Even so, the Lao PDR economic structure gradually came to be based primarily on
the private sector, with SOEs accounting for a relatively small share o f economic activity; and growth in
trade continued, together with an increase in private investment.’ Towards the end o f the 199Os, the
country underwent an acute period o f macroeconomic instability due to the Asian financial crisis and a
breakdown in monetary and fiscal management in 1997-199tL2 In late 1999, the Government responded
by launching a successful stabilization program, tightening monetary and fiscal policies and by early 2001
the currency had stabilized and inflation was reduced to single digits.

8.
Annual average real GDP growth rate was 6.3 percent between 1991 and 2000, despite the
relatively slow pace o f reform and the Asian crisis. This compares favorably with the growth rates o f
China, Vietnam and other East Asian countries during this period. At i t s lowest point (1998), growth f e l l
to 4 percent. Manufacturing and services were the main drivers o f growth during the early 199Os, with
agriculture taking the lead during the later years. Natural resources also contributed significantly to
growth during the early 1990s, but this dropped o f f with a decline in forestry sector contributions. Exports
grew at an annual rate o f 27 percent during 1990-1995, but export growth fell to only 2 percent a year
during 1995-2000.
9.
During 2001-2004, increased government commitment accelerated the pace of reforms. This
commitment i s reflected by the phased reforms launched in 2002 in public expenditure management,

’

SOEs accounted for 1 percent of employment, 20 percent of manufacturing output, and 30 percent of bank credit in 2002, and
private investment represented 10.1 percent o f GDP in 2003.
Ambitious irrigation investments were implemented without appropriate financing (heavy borrowing from the central bank),
resulting in triple digit inflation in 1998 and deep exchange rate depreciations of the domestic currency.

*

-3banking and rural finance, SOEs, forestry, trade and the private sector, as well as by the continued
stabilization program that has tightened monetary and fiscal policies and reduced inflation to single digits.
Nevertheless, the Government’s fiscal position has continued to remain fragile with relatively weak
revenue performance, weak public sector management, a weak banking sector, and poorly managed
remaining SOEs. Some progress has been made in improving public expenditure management, including
publication o f the State Budget, creation o f a central Procurement Monitoring Unit and State Audit
Organization. The Government has also implemented an ambitious decentralization policy, intended to
bring decision making closer to the field level, but this has, unfortunately, made fiscal management more
difficult. Furthermore, there has been little progress in reforming civil service management and pay.
Overall, public administration reform has proved much more difficult to implement than the first wave o f
economic reforms.
10.
Real GDP growth averaged slightly lower but still a robust rate of 5.6percent a year between
2001 and 2004. Annual growth reached 6 percent in 2004. All sectors - agriculture, manufacturing,
tourism as well as mining and hydropower - grew during this period, with mining taking off for the first
time. Private investment, especially foreign investment, showed a persistent increase over these five
years, albeit from a very low level, but growing to nearly 10 percent o f GDP in 2004. While there were
investments in tourism and garments, most o f this increase in 2003 and 2004 came from foreign
investment in the mining sector, especially in copper and gold. Export growth stagnated during the 20002003 period, but jumped in 2004 to a rate of 18 percent, driven mainly b y garments, electricity, mining
and ~ o f f e e with
, ~ most o f i t going to ASEAN countries and China.

11.
The macroeconomic situation has been significantly better during the 2001-2004 period than
in the previous four years. Headline inflation averaged 11 percent a year during the 2001-2004 period
compared to an average of nearly 70 percent a year during 1997-2000. There has been a noteworthy
improvement in overall macroeconomic performance over the last four years4, although Lao PDR’s track
record of maintaining single-digit inflation rates over a long period remains weak. Nevertheless, the shortterm macroeconomic situation i s satisfactory, as end-of-period inflation rate reached single digits (Le. 8.6
percent) in December 2004.
12.
This performance was helped by signifcant fiscal adjustment. In 2002/03 when revenue from
timber royalties and other non-tax revenue f e l l b y nearly 2 percent o f GDP, the overall fiscal deficit (after
grants) jumped (Figure 1). The needed fiscal adjustment took place in 2003/04. Vigorous government
efforts to mobilize taxes in 2003/04 combined with the full-year impact o f petroleum taxes increased tax
revenue (excluding timber royalties) from 8.1 percent of GDP in 2002/03 to 8.9 percent of GDP in
2003/045 highlighting a significant additional tax effort o f 0.8 percent of GDP. This led to a modest
increase in total revenue o f 0.1 percent o f GDP @e., from 11.1 to 11.2 percent), because there were
offsetting declines in collections from timber royalties, non-tax revenue and import tax revenue (due to
AFTA tariff reductions) in that year. Expenditures were reduced b y 1.8 percent o f GDP, and the fiscal
deficit fell accordingly in 2003/04. This helped to keep domestic financing o f the deficit low and
contributed to bringing inflation down to single digits in December 2004.
Structural constraints to sustainably increase revenues have begun to be addressed, but
13.
progress will be slow. Although the revenue effort in Lao PDR i s low relative to many o f i t s neighbors,
I n the same period, imports grew 23 percent and consisted of machinery, equipment, and raw material for the garment industry.
Large discrepancies exist among estimates of exports and imports provided by different agencies in Lao PDR. Discrepancies in
Lao PDR export and import data were described in the World Bank Economic Monitor (May 2004 issue).
During this period, monetary policy was geared towards reducing inflation. Credit growth has thus remained subdued in 2004
with broad money growing at around 20 percent. T h i s was made possible by the avoidance of bank financing of the budget.
IMF: Lao PDR: Staff Report for the 2004 Article IV Consultation, November 2004 (page 9).

-4the difference narrows markedly once revenue i s expressed as a share of non-agricultural GDP, where
Lao PDR stands at 18 percent compared to Vietnam’s 20 percent and Cambodia’s 12 percent. Progress in
achieving Lao PDR’s revenue potential w i l l be slow due to inadequate technical capacity o f revenue
administration and a highly decentralized revenue administration in which provinces currently have weak
incentives to collect and remit revenue to the national budget. In early 2004, the Government took several
corrective measures: re-establishing central control over seven main international checkpoints with
revenue collected deposited into central government accounts; increasing control over major provincial
large tax-payers units, modifying regulations to provide greater control b y the center over granting o f tax
exemptions to investors; and frequent monitoring o f provincial revenue collection and remittance to the
national budget. But more w i l l need to be done if the revenue share of GDP i s to reach i t s potential.
Figure 1: Economic Performance
GDP Growth (%) and CPI (%), 1996-2004
+GDP

(left axis) +Inflation

FDI in Lao P D R (US$m)

(right axis)

OApproved
- 16C

-- 80

--

96

97

98

99

00

01

02

03

60

2000l01

Revenue and Expenditure (%of GDP)
=Revenue,
25

,

incl. grants
215

-Expenditure

492

500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
I00
50
0

04

QActual

2001102

503

2002/03

2003104

Current Account Balance (%of GDP)
0

+Deficit

-2

20 7

-4
-6

-a
10

.I2

onmi
-4.6
-10 1

-4.4

-4.0

-5.8

-3.9

I

Excluding official transfers 0 hcluding official transfers

Lao PDR is increasing its integration, both regionally and globally. Sub-regionally, Lao PDR i s
14.
an active partner in the emerging Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) Economic Cooperation Program
(consisting o f Thailand, Myanmar, Yunnan province of China, Vietnam, Cambodia and L a o PDR). The
GMS program has strategic importance in terms o f potential exports (including hydropower and mineral
products) to rapidly industrializing neighboring countries, the development o f transport corridors, and
sustainable development and management o f the Mekong River. Given that most o f i t s trade and foreign
investment relations are with these countries, including sale o f hydropower, ongoing GMS initiatives are
supported strongly by Lao PDR. Lao PDR also participates in the Mekong River Commission (MRC),
which explores opportunities for regional cooperation in the Mekong River Basin. On a broader regional
and global level, Lao PDR joined the Association o f Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the ASEAN
Free Trade Area (AFTA) in 1998; applied for World Trade Organization (WTO) accession in 1999, and
was granted Normal Trade Relations (NTR) status b y the United States in November 2004.
Implementation o f commitments under AFTA, the United States bilateral trade agreement, and W T O are

-5opening, and w i l l continue to open, opportunities for further trade in goods and services sectors and
investment within the region and globally. The granting o f NTR by the United States in November 2004
and the early harvest program from China as well as application o f lower Common External Preferential
Tariffs on exports to ASEAN countries further expands export opportunities for Lao PDR. Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI) trends are significant relative to the size o f the economy, although there are yearto-year fluctuations in flows depending on the timing o f large hydropower or mining projects. The
Government i s working on a decree regarding financing o f terrorists, has established an “Anti-Money
Laundering (AML) Information Center” to monitor suspicious transactions, and i s preparing an AML
law.

c.

POVERTY REDUCTION AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

15.
Economic progress has resulted in a substantial reduction in poverty over the past decade,
although poverty remains high. The incidence o f poverty f e l l from 46 percent in 1992 to 33 percent in
2002-2003 (Table 1). This i s an impressive achievement, which suggests that Lao PDR i s on track in
terms of meeting the poverty Millennium Development Goal (MDG) b y 2015 if i t i s able to maintain the
pace o f progress. Poverty reduction was more rapid in rural areas than in urban areas, and faster in the
north than in the center or south. As consumption increased more in villages than in cities, overall
inequality declined. The Gini index of per capita real consumption fell from 34.9 in 1997-1999 to 33 in
2002-2003. In spite o f the progress, poverty in Lao PDR remains among the highest in the region. Poverty
in the uplands i s 43 percent, compared to only 28 percent in the lowlands. Poverty in the Government’s
designated 47 priority districts i s twice as high as in the 70 non-priority districts. A vast majority o f the
poor are ethnic minorities.
Year

2002103
1997198
1992193

Lao
PDR

32.9
39.1
46.0

Area

Region

Priority District

Altitude

Urban

Rural

Vien

Nor.

Cen.

Sou.

First

Second

Other

Low

Mid

Up

19.6
22.1
26.5

37.6
42.5
51.8

16.4
13.5
33.6

37.3
47.3
51.6

34.7
39.4
45.0

32.4
39.8
45.7

49.5
63.0

40.9
41.7

25.7
30.5

27.7

36.9

42.7

16.
Social indicators have improved somewhat, but are not commensurate with economic
improvements and remain low compared to regional and lower-income country averages.
Improvements were achieved between 1990 and 2000 on a number o f social indicators including child
mortality, gender equality, particularly in primary enrollment, and child malnutrition. However, most
social indicators s t i l l fall well below the average o f East Asian countries (Table 2). Although trends in
education showed promise in the early 1990s, improvements slowed down in 1998 following the financial
crisis, are yet to recover fully, and the country risks not reaching the universal completion o f primary
education goal by 2015 (Figure 2). Ministry o f Education data for 2001/02 showed a net enrollment ratio
o f 81 percent. However, household survey data for the same year showed a much lower net enrollment
ratio of 62 percent and of only 45 percent for children in the poorest income quintile. Maternal and child
mortality and morbidity are s t i l l high b y regional standards, as i s child malnutrition. Health care
utilization i s low (less than 30 percent), and quality of services i s poor. Access to an improved water
source i s available to 37 percent o f the population, far below the regional average o f 76 percent. The
percentage o f paved roads in Lao PDR (15 percent) i s among the lowest in the region.
The reasons behind these poor social outcomes are multiple and inter-related. They include:
17.
widespread poverty and high levels o f vulnerability which render many basic services unaffordable to the
poor; geographic isolation and inadequate infrastructure which hinder physical access; language and

-6cultural barriers; and poor service quality due to low levels o f resources and low capacity o f providers.
Expenditures on education and health in 2001 were 1.9 percent and 1 percent of GDP, respectively.
Communities finance 30-40 percent o f capital expenditures in education and patients and NGOs pay for
most health expenditures (60 percent and 25 percent, respectively). National health spending was only
U S $ l l per capita (half the regional average). In relative terms, Lao PDR i s the lowest ranking East Asian
country on the U N D P Human Development Index (2003), where i t places 13lStout o f 148 countries.
Weaknesses in the educational and health systems, and in basic service delivery systems, w i l l continue to
hamper improvement in the social indicators, unless key structural issues -- low and inefficient use of
resources; inadequate incentives for service delivery; low capacity o f service providers; and core issues o f
physical and financial access -- are addressed.

Net primary enrollment ratio
(percent)
Female (percent)
Primary completion rate
Access to safe water (percent o f
population)
Physicians (per 1,000 people)
Paved roads (percent)

61

81

93

57
39

I1
74
37

100
16

48
58

0.2
13.8

0.2
15

1.7
21.2

12.9

18.
Vulnerability remains high, especially for ethnic minority and upland communities. Forty-eight
percent of the population belongs to one of the 49 ethnic minority groups. Most live in the upland areas
where livelihood systems are delicately balanced and poor communications exacerbate the challenge o f
providing social services. Each ethnic group has i t s own culture and traditions that dictate cropping cycles
and patterns, as well as inheritance, health care, and l i f e cycle events. This rich cultural diversity makes
service provision complex. The relationship between people and the environment in these fragile, yet
resource rich areas, i s easily upset. Roads and infrastructure, essential for improving access to services
and developing natural resources, also bring threats o f logging and unsustainable development and
programs that aim to limit opium production or stabilize shifting cultivation may raise the risk o f reducing
access of upland communities to the forests and forest products on which they depend. The safety net
system in Lao PDR i s underdeveloped and vulnerable groups are especially susceptible to shocks that
affect rice yields and livestock. A further complication i s the severe contamination b y Unexploded
Ordnances (UXO) in ten o f 18 provinces, which adds costs to infrastructure development and contributes
to poverty b y limiting agricultural production. W i t h respect to labor conditions, Lao PDR has ratified only
one o f the fundamental labor standards conventions (No. 29 on Forced Labor), although another five
conventions are currently under consideration. While the L a o Labor L a w does conform in principle to
some basic labor standards, i t does not offer adequate enforcement. Anti-discrimination legislation also
exists but enforcement i s again weak.

-719.
Progress has been made in improving the well-being of women, but significant challenges
remain. At 27.3 percent, women’s participation in the National Assembly i s one o f the highest in the
region and the constitution and laws provide for gender equality. A new law on the Development and
Protection o f Women also provides a legal framework for addressing domestic violence and trafficking in
women and children. Progress has been made in improving social indicators for females and the majority
o f small businesses in Lao PDR are run b y women. However, despite the progress, maternal mortality i s
s t i l l one o f the highest in the region at 650 per 100,000. Lao PDR women work on average one hour a
day more than Lao PDR men, and rural women, especially, bear the main responsibility for ensuring food
security for the family. Greater gaps and inequalities can be found in rural areas, and especially among
ethnic minority women. Within the rich diversity of cultures lie social norms, local beliefs, and marriage
and inheritance traditions that discriminate against or marginalize the groups o f women they affect.6
Increased migration has led to greater vulnerability of women and children to traffickers.
Figure 2: Progress Toward MDGs, Selected Indicators
Primary Completion Rates

Child Malnutrition

P

2

50

5

--

zf E.IF 30
20

d Actual

- - Trend to reach

C

$
l

E

10

E

O

rr
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

Under-5 Mortality Rate

e
UI

200

t:

5 150

=%!

100

O-

50

0

r

7

I

1

-Actual

40

Trend to
reach
MDGs

Maternal Mortalii

l- -- 7
-Actual

4 A c t u a l

- - Trend to reach

Trend to

~

reach
MDGs

~~

04

I

I

I

,

I

,

I

1990 1995 20W 2005 2010 2015 2020

Note: The data on MDG trends reflect householdsurvey data from 2000.

D.

GOVERNANCE
ISSUES

20.
Lao PDR governance indicators stand below regional and global averages. In 2003, Lao PDR’s
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) ratings for key governance indicators were below the
IDA average (Figure 3).’ Lao PDR was close to IDA averages for property rights and governance, and for
revenue mobilization, but i t was lower on budget and financial management, and seriously lower on
transparency and accountability. The IMF ranked Lao PDR’ s public expenditure systems below that o f 24
For example, literacy rates for the majority Lao PDR Phutai are 84 percent for males and 62 percent for females, while among
Hmong-Yao ethnic groups i t i s 45 percent for males and only 8 percent for females.
The 2004 CPIA exercise i s currently underway with a new ratings methodology in place, but will not be completedbefore April
2005.

’

-8Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC). W i t h respect to the legal and judicial framework, a body o f law
i s slowly being developed and applied in the courts. The lack o f a clear distinction between the executive
and judiciary hampers enforcement, and transparency remains a key issue. Weak and arbitrary legal
enforcement, excessive business license requirements and lack o f clarity on property rights continue to
affect private sector development. The financial management system and fiscal reporting remain
underdeveloped, with minimal reporting, auditing and accounting standards. Tax administration i s
improving, but remains weak, especially in customs, where illegal cross-border trade continues with
neighboring countries. Civil service reform i s needed to address incentive issues, given the current low
salarieshenefits and opportunities for rent-seeking behavior.

Figure 3. Lao PDR’s 2003 CPIA in comparison with IDA Averages

Governance

Economic Management

1. Macroeconomic Balances
20. Transparency &Accountabili
19. Public Administration

18. Revenue Mobilization

4. Development Program
5. Trade and FX

17. Budget and Financial Management
16. Property Rights and Governance

6. Financial Stability
7. Banking Efficiency

15. Poverty Analysis and Monitoring

8. Private Sector Environment

14. Social Protection and Labor
12.Equity of Public Reiource Use

Social/ Equity

1

-

10. Environment

-

11. Gender

Lao PDR

Structural

IDA Averages~

21.
I n April 2003, the Government developed a governance reform program’ based on actions in
four priority areas: (i) public service reform; (ii) people’s participation; (iii) the rule of law; and (iv)
sound financial management. Efforts are underway on a pilot basis to improve the management of
public administration through increased professionalism and merit-based recruitment. Other efforts to
improve public sector management include drafting an anti-corruption decree, increasing transparency in
the accounting and audit functions, improving tax administration and establishing checks and balances in
the civil service. Work on strengthening participation, encouraging local empowerment and clarifying
roles of central and local authorities i s continuing, as i s progress to strengthen judicial reform and public
financial management, including fiscal planning, budget preparation, revenue and expenditure
management and financial legislation and regulations.
E.

CAPACITY

22.
Capacity constraints are a significant challenge in Lao PDR and contribute to poor performance
on CPIA indicators. While public sector staff are educated,’ gaps in incentives, competencies, and s k i l l
types and distribution prevent key functions from being performed effectively. Shortages o f management
and technical s k i l l s in finance, accounting and procurement are particularly acute. Organizational
Govemment of Lao PDR, Progress Report to the Governance Round Table Meeting, November 2004, following up on the
Govemment’s earlier report, Priority Areas for Governance Reform: Public Service Reform, People’s Participation, Rule of Law,
and Sound Financial Management, Round Table Process, March 2003.
Over 90 percent o f civil servants have some form of post-secondary qualification and around 10 percent have university-level
qualifications (Source: Department of Public Administration, Prime Minister’s Office).

-9structures and basic management systems are not aligned with development priorities. Centralized
decision-making often discourages local initiatives while low pay levels, delays in payment (especially in
rural areas), and lack o f performance-based promotions may act as disincentives. Distinctions between
legislative, executive, and judicial functions are blurred. Decision-makers are often isolated from the civil
service and conversely, civil servants are often poorly informed about government policy, legislation and
even administrative procedures. Government controls on private sector activities include cumbersome
investment procedures and annual tax licenses. While the Government has expressed strong preference
for local expertise to provide technical assistance, there are few consultants with the requisite skills, often
hindering donor efforts to build capacity.
23.
The Government is taking a number of steps to address capacity constraints. Community
development projects and activities are building capacity at the field level to prepare, implement and
monitor outcomes o f local investments. Recognition o f the challenges posed b y ASEAN and W T O
accession has spurred openness to learning from the experience o f China, Malaysia, Vietnam, and
Thailand and encouraged growing ties with neighboring countries and an examination of their reform
processes. Civil servant training has been expanded and diversified, and modern public sector and
economic management concepts have entered the curriculumo f degree courses.

11.
A.

LAO PDR’s DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND CHALLENGES

COUNTRYVISION

24.
The National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy (NGPES) is a government-owned
strategy that lays out Lao PDR’s development vision. Lao PDR’s NGPES i s the first full poverty
reduction strategy prepared b y the Government and seeks to help the country meet i t s MDGs b y 2015 and
foster economic growth
graduate from L D C status b y 2020. The three pillars o f the strategy are to: (i)
with equity; (ii)
develop and modernize Lao PDR’s social and economic infrastructure; and (iii)
enhance
human resource development. The NGPES stresses the Government’s commitment to sound
macroeconomic policies to sustain growth, and prudent monetary and fiscal policies combined with
broad-based structural reforms to promote private sector-led development.
The NGPES was developed in a participatory and consultative manner. The NGPES
25.
Committee, formed to oversee the process, drew membership from key ministries and agencies, and
representatives from MBOs. A government-implemented Participation Action Plan for NGPES
development was supported by the UNDP, the World Bank, and other donors. Intensive consultations
were carried out with donor partners in the context o f the 7* and 8” Round Table meetings for the Interim
PRSP and NGPES final report, respectively. The consultation process was broadened to include
participation b y international NGOs and the private sector. In addition to consultations with official
MBOs, such as the Lao PDR Front for National Construction and the Lao PDR Women’s Union,
discussions were held with provincial governments, media and academics. The document was submitted
to the National Assembly in October 2003, which approved i t after a four-day workshop.

26.
The NGPES is a major step forward that builds on the country’s potential for growth (Box 1).
The strategy: (i)
acknowledges the importance o f governance challenges; (ii)
begins to articulate solid
sets appropriate directions for sustaining
strategies for improving service delivery and infrastructure; (iii)
growth; (iv) seeks to address inequity and vulnerability; and (v) provides a framework for monitoring and
implementation. The NGPES also recognizes the importance o f improving Lao PDR’s international
competitiveness, attracting FDI, and undertaking governance reforms. I t emphasizes the value o f rural
infrastructure and the need to enhance human development through a strong agenda for improving

- 10education. However, the NGPES would benefit from stronger prioritization and costing o f actions,
together with a clear plan for implementing i t s objectives and a mechanism for monitoring progress. I t
w i l l also require strong political leadership to overcome the challenges that w i l l arise during
implementation.
Box 1: Sources of Growth
Lao PDR has a number o f significant assets and resources to promote strong growth and development. This potential
can only be realized, however, if natural resources are well-managed. Legal, regulatory and tax weaknesses, as well
as institutional and organizational capacity to manage the benefits from natural resource use must also be addressed
in order to attract and secure domestic and international capital for public and private partnerships.

Agriculture - There i s considerable potential for nearly tripling the area now under cultivation for annual and
perennial crops. Growth will come from a transition to greater market orientation (including land registration),
improved transport infrastructure, higher productivity, and diversification o f crops. Particular attention w i l l need to
be paid to managing risks associated with local food security and resource degradation.
Manufacturing and services are assuming an increasingly significant role in the economy. Labor i s among the
cheapest in the region but productivity i s low. Sustaining performance o f the sector w i l l require improvements in
key building blocks such as the environment for doing business, infrastructure, and market institutions, as well as
facilitating regional trade and transport links.
Forestry has the potential to contribute more significantly to Lao PDR’s development b y increasing revenues and
improving livelihoods, if the sector i s better managed. Although forests cover nearly half o f the country, the
contribution to GDP i s only 3 percent and deforestation and forest degradation are significant problems in some
districts. Improving forest management and utilization and expanding community participation are critical to
sustainable development o f the sector.
Hydropower has impressive potential for both domestic power generation and for electricity exports. Reforms w i l l
be needed to clarify governance arrangements in the sector, facilitate private participation, improve sector planning
and site-specific preparatory studies, and ensure the good use o f the revenues that hydropower exports generate.
M i n i n g i s underdeveloped but has excellent geological potential to develop mineral resources such as gold, copper,
sapphire and potash. TO do so, Lao PDR w i l l need to address weaknesses in the existing legal, regulatory, and tax
regime. As with other natural resource sectors, the development contribution o f the sector w i l l ultimately depend on
how the revenue and benefit streams are managed.
Source: World Bank, Realizing the Development Potential of Lao PDR, 2004.

B.

K E Y DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

27.
The NGPES outlines the key challenges that must be overcome in order for Lao PDR to reach
its economic and social development goals. The analysis in the NGPES, the related Joint Staff Advisory
Note (JSAN, Report No. 29966), discussed by the Board in December 2004, and the World Bank’s
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) highlights a range o f actions necessary to meet the overarching
objectives o f sustaining Lao PDR’s growth and poverty reduction performance while at the same time
improving social outcomes. To continue the momentum o f the past decade, prudent macroeconomic
management w i l l need to be complemented with continued, deepened economic reforms to improve the
productivity o f agriculture and other sectors, strengthen the enabling environment for trade and the
private sector, and ensure a more sustainable and equitable use of natural resources. To convert this
growth into improved social outcomes, strengthened public sector management, especially o f public
finances, w i l l be critical, as w i l l more accountable and well targeted service delivery, and a
comprehensive, people-centered approach to reducing poverty in upland areas. In short, in i t s next phase
o f development, Lao PDR needs to deepen and broaden sources o f growth and increased productivity,
tackle the difficult institutional and systemic challenges o f public expenditure management for pro-poor
service delivery, and develop effective community-based poverty reduction strategies. Reinvigorating
efforts to mobilize revenues w i l l be central to the Government’s efforts to maintain macroeconomic

-11stability while making progress in addressing the country’s pressing development needs. Lasting reform
of the state-owned banks and enterprises i s also essential to ensuring a sustainable fiscal outlook.

28.
First, sustaining growth will require a strong economic environment where the various sectors
can accelerate productivity and benefit from linkages to dynamic regional markets. The NGPES
recognizes that growth w i l l need to be sustained through trade liberalization, higher agricultural
productivity, and private sector development. While past agricultural growth rates have been among the
highest in the region, further growth in the sector w i l l require increased diversification and management
of risks associated with household food security, as well as improvements in property rights and land
titling. Improving the performance o f the manufacturing and services sectors w i l l require greater efforts in
creating a favorable business environment, developing market institutions, facilitating off-farm
opportunities and regional linkages, increasing the competitiveness o f the private sector, and
implementing lasting enterprise and financial sector reforms. Improving exports w i l l also require further
liberalization of the trade regime. The delivery o f infrastructure services (transport, communication,
energy, water and sanitation), including adequate financing to maintain existing stocks and improve
access, w i l l be essential and w i l l need to be developed in a concerted effort with GMS partners. The
NGPES appropriately sets ambitious growth and macro-fiscal targets, but achieving these goals w i l l
require significant structural and governance reforms, disciplined monetary and fiscal policies, a realistic
and transparent budgeting process, and the effective management of revenues from natural resources.
29.
Second, strengthening public financial management, governance and comprehensive
community-driven planning processes will be key to improving social outcomes and reducing
vulnerability. Successful implementation o f the NGPES and progress towards the MDGs w i l l require a
shift in resources toward NGPES priorities and improvements in expenditure management, particularly
regarding expenditure planning and budgeting, the quality and coverage o f financial reporting and
predictability in budget execution. The public expenditure management reform agenda should be
complemented b y reforms in central-local government relations and c i v i l service pay and management.
Policy guidance on these issues i s expected to emerge from the forthcoming Party Congress. Bold,
innovative steps w i l l have to be taken to truly improve social outcomes including improving the access,
targeting, and efficiency o f service delivery, developing adequate pay and employment policies in the
social sectors, exploring alternative options for service delivery to remote communities, and taking an
integrated approach to improving upland rural livelihoods. Comprehensive approaches that include
community-based participatory planning processes w i l l be needed to make the most effective use of
resources allocated for poverty reduction in the poorest areas. More resources w i l l need to be directed to
education and health as well as redirecting limited resources to ensure greater access o f the poor and
vulnerable to quality basic services.

30.
Third, management of natural resources and the environment must be strengthened so that the
country’s natural endowments can contribute effectively towards growth, poverty reduction, and social
improvements. Improved management o f forestry, hydropower, and mining resources i s required because
o f their potential contribution to revenues that can be used for poverty reduction, growth-related
investments and improved social and environmental outcomes and because o f the need to protect the
natural environment. Issues that need to be addressed include strengthening o f the framework for privatepublic partnerships that could bring in the needed investment as well as managerial capacity,
strengthening o f government capacity at the central and provincial levels to manage complex multisectoral activities and promote opportunities for stakeholders to participate in project design and
implementation, and strengthening o f the public financial management arrangements to ensure proper
utilization o f revenues. Improvements in the policies and implementation arrangements to manage social
and environmental impacts are also essential, including reform o f the legal and institutional framework
governing the environment, strengthened institutions, better coordination, greater participation and
transparency, and stronger law enforcement.

- 123 1,
Fourth, building capacity is a key challenge in implementing and monitoring the NGPES. The
NGPES sees capacity development as essential to improved governance and public administration and
achievement o f NGPES priorities. The NGPES recognizes the need for a more comprehensive approach
develop an inventory of current
to developing capacity and expresses the Government's intent to: (i)
identify and prioritize capacity building requirements at all levels and
capacity building initiatives; (ii)
create a comprehensive
prepare a framework for implementation of capacity building programs; (iii)
capacity building strategy based on these assessments; and (iv) implement the strategy through an
approach that ensures coordination between the various levels of government and development partners.
Translating these priorities into concrete actions w i l l be difficult, however, and w i l l require a long-term,
systematic approach. An effective monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for the NGPES w i l l need to
be put in place, using participatory processes to update and refine the strategy and action programs on a
continuous basis.

C.

MEDIUM-TERM
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK

32.
Economic growth is projected to be strong, averaging 6.3 percent a year over the CAS-period
(Table 3). This i s in line with the medium-term IMF assessment as reported in i t s November 2004 Article
I V Consultation report. Growth w i l l be driven in large measure by the jump in foreign investment inflows
in mining and hydropower sectors, as well as by growth in mineral exports. Improvements in the
macroeconomic situation and investment climate over the last two years w i l l also contribute to sustaining
rates of domestic private investment and growth in other exports. The latter i s likely to be supported by
the projected strong regional expansion and the newly-granted NTR b y the United States, though garment
exports w i l l be hurt by the expiry of the Multifibre Arrangement (MFA) in 2005.
Table 3: Base Economic Projections
Actual

Proiected

Inflation rate (end-of-period)
Private investment/GDP
ExportdGDP
Current Account DeficiVGDP (including grants)
Revenue/GDP

33.
Private investment and exports will perform better too. The rising trend in private investment
that Lao PDR has experienced over the last two years i s expected to continue, reaching an average o f
around 12 percent of GDP, mainly due to higher foreign investments. The dollar value of exports i s projected to more than double during the next four years, driven b y gold and copper exports, raising the export share of GDP from 25.6 percent in 2004 to 29.9 percent in 200610.

34.
Implementation of AFTA" and commitments under the United States Bilateral Trade
Agreement are expected to improve investor perceptions. Continued integration o f Lao PDR i s expected
lo

Ongoing investments by an Australian mining company, Oxiana, in a new copper mine (opening next year) and expansion of

i t s existing gold mine over the next few years, will boost both foreign investment inflows and exports. Agreements with other

mining companies for additional new foreign investments are in process, but they are not factored into the above projection.
However, though final decision on NT2 i s awaited, NT2 investments are factored into the above projection as the base-case.
l1
In 2005, Lao PDR has 3,402 tariff lines in the Inclusion L i s t and 87 percent of the tariff lines in that l i s t have a tariff of 0-5
percent.

-13to drive other reforms that w i l l be needed to face regional competition and to expand exports successfully.
This includes ASEAN and GMS initiatives that are aimed at facilitating regional trade as well as trade of
Lao PDR through neighbors’ seaports. Those other reforms also include further liberalization o f private
business registration and o f private investment regulations, without which the private sector cannot
exploit the new opportunities for agricultural and manufactured exports resulting from increasing
integration. Similarly, infrastructure improvements, especially roads and rural electrification, as well as
greater openness to private investment in the telecommunications sector, w i l l be key in sustaining
regional exports and strong agricultural and manufacturing growth.I2 Unless Lao PDR ensures that
implementation o f other reforms and improvements in infrastructure accompany increased integration
with the region and the world, sustaining GDP growth rates of 6-7 percent a year for the rest of the decade
w i l l be difficult.
35.
Inflation in December 2004 was in single digits, but only continued vigilance can maintain that
over the medium-term. There are significant pressures for increases in the civil service wages and given
how l o w the wages are, these pressures are legitimate. However, i t i s essential to ensure that the annual
increments in the total wage-bill do not outpace the annual increments in revenue so that fiscal
sustainability i s assured. The 2004105 budget approved b y the National Assembly in October 2004 sought
larger increases in salaries and allowance^'^ than would be appropriate for fiscal sustainability and the
revenue performance in the first quarter o f 2004/05 confirm that the risk o f the proposed increases in
wage-bill outpacing revenue increases was real. The Government has thus revised the 2004/05 budget and
i s committed to submitting the revisions to the National Assembly at i t s next session in late April 2005.14
These revisions limit the increases in wages to 20 percent and in allowances to 30 percent with effect
from July 1, 2005, with the total salary or wage-bill capped at Kip 1,295 billion for 2004/05; the full-year
impact o f these increases in 2005/06 are in line with likely increases in revenue. The overall fiscal deficit
i s expected to be contained at around 4 percent o f GDP with domestic financing limited to a very small
amount.

The Government has committed to continuing its efforts at strengthening revenue collection
36.
and adopting new revenue-raising measures if necessary. Recent efforts at improving revenue
collection are expected to be enhanced by further actions to centralize customs (including i t s
formalization through a revised Customs Law) and tax administration, greater focus on the large taxpayers as well as medium-sized ones, increased attention to rationalizing and limiting exemptions for
investors and timely preparations for implementing the single-rate Value Added Tax (VAT) in 2007.
Lao PDR will now be under the Fund’s Surveillance after the Poverty Reduction and Growth
37.
Facility (PRGF) expires in April 2005. The I M F ’ s November 2004 Article I V Consultation reported
robust medium-term growth prospects and low inflation in the single digits. The key short-term risk was
the 2004/05 budget approved by the National Assembly in October 2004 that included ambitious revenue
targets and large, unsustainable increases in the wage-bill. T o mitigate this risk, the 2004/05 budget i s
being revised in line with the discussions with the Fund and the Bank as noted above. In addition, the
PRGF sought ‘safeguard’ actions for the Bank o f Lao PDR and several structural measures. Since these
are unlikely to be accomplished within the timeframe o f the PRGF cycle that expires in April 2005, the
~

’’ See W o r l d Bank, Realizing the Development Potential of Go PDR, 2004.

in wages and allowances were to be effective in the last quarter o f this fiscal year, Le., July 2005 and thus
has not yet been implemented.
l4
T h e Govemment i s revising the 2004/05 budget to limit wage increases to fiscally sustainable levels. A letter f r o m the Finance
Minister has been received, assuring the W o r l d Bank that the agreed revisions to the 2004/05 budget w i l l be submitted to the
National Assembly at its next session. The letter also provides assurances, on behalf o f the Govemment, that increases in the
wage-bill w i l l not outpace increases in revenue over the medium-term, revenue collection w i l l be strengthened in general, and i f
necessary, new revenue-raising measures w i l l be adopted to ensure fiscal sustainability, macroeconomic stability and l o w
inflation.
l3Proposed increases

- 14IMF decided not to complete the fourth review. As this situation w i l l continue until the Government
requests a successor PRGF, IMF staff w i l l now undertake at least two missions to the country each year,
one o f which w i l l coincide with Article I V Consultations, and w i l l provide an assessment o f the
macroeconomic situation to the World Bank after these missions. Fund and Bank staff w i l l continue their
close collaboration during these missions.
38.
The base medium-term outlook is not without downside risks. Thefirst relates to risk o f failure
to sustain macroeconomic stability and thus to maintain low inflation and stable exchange rates.
Economy-wide pressures for increases in the wage-bill, provincial demands for expanding domesticallyfinanced capital spending and the possibility of a slowdown in revenue reforms are key risks that w i l l
have to be managed over the medium-term. The Government’s adoption o f a five-year public expenditure
management strengthening program (PEMSP), including a review o f center-province fiscal relations,
implementation o f initial actions to centralize customs and tax administration as well as the recent
revision o f the 2004/05 budget aimed at reducing wage increases to fiscally sustainable levels, all help to
mitigate these risks in the short-term. The second risk arises from the absence o f the I M F ’ s PRGF
program and the resulting reduction in monitoring and dialogue o f the IMF with the Government on
macroeconomic performance o f Lao PDR. The World Bank w i l l work closely with the IMF staff during
this period, especially through the semi-annual missions mentioned above, to mitigate this risk. The third
risk relates to disruption in the planned inflow o f mining and hydropower investments over the next 3-4
years. This risk i s probably low, given the strong commitment o f high-level policymakers in Lao PDR to
these projects. The fourth risk relates to a slowdown in implementation o f other reforms and in
improvements and investments in infrastructure, both critical for sustaining growth in agricultural and
manufacturing sectors and their exports. Given the history o f reforms in Lao PDR, and the ambivalence
that exists among the top leadership about the pace and content o f reforms, this risk i s quite real. While
such a slowdown may not affect the planned foreign investments described above, they w i l l certainly
weaken the broad-based nature o f growth that Lao PDR has experienced in the past and slow down
overall growth.

D.

EXTERNAL
DEBT

39.
The most recent Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA)” concludes that in the medium-term Lao
PDR’s debt service burden is manageable, provided economic reforms-especially on the fiscal frontare maintained. Sensitivity analysis reveals that if the pace of economic reforms falters and export and
GDP growth slows, the debt service burden would rise. While the ratio of debt sewice-to exports would
s t i l l remain below the critical threshold value established for countries like Lao PDR with similar policy
and institutional environment, the debt service-to-revenue ratio would rise.

40.
The high stock of external debt places Lao PDR in a high-risk category among low income
countries. The country could be potentially eligible for HIPC debt relief, although the authorities have
stated that they do not intend to avail themselves o f such relief. Their view i s that the transactions costs of
the HIPC procedure and possibly reduced access to bilateral and commercial inflows would outweigh the
gains from debt relief in the medium term. Bank and Fund staff concur. However, Lao PDR i s now
eligible to receive most and possibly all future IDA financing in the form o f grants, thereby reducing
public sector borrowing requirements, and this should contribute to easing the debt burden over time.
41.
Public and publicly guaranteed external debt amounts to US$1.9 billion or 92 percent of GDP
in 2003. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) account for about 5 percent o f the debt stock. Most o f Lao
PDR’ s external debt-about 70 percent of the nominal stock at end-2003-is comprised of concessional
l5The DSA, completed in November 2004 (Attachment 3), was conducted jointly with the IMF, World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank.

- 15 loans from multilateral creditors, primarily the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
The biggest bilateral creditor i s Russia, which accounted for almost 80 percent o f the stock o f bilateral
debt at end-2003. The stock of Russian debt at end-2003, following the agreement, i s estimated at
US$387 million, after applying a 70 percent upfront discount and an exchange rate of 0.6 rubles to the
dollar and this i s part of the base-line scenario.
42.
The Lao PDR authorities have approached Russia for more concessional terms. A
rescheduling of the stock of Russian debt closer to Naples terms could lower the debt service-to-revenue
ratio o f Lao PDR b y 1-2 percentage points per year between 2004 and 2010.
The baseline scenario (para. 32) which reflects continuing economic reform and good policy
43.
implementation would result in a fall in the public sector borrowing requirement over time. The debt
stock indicators would decline continuously over the projection period, though remaining above the
threshold value. On the other hand, the debt sewice indicators would remain below the critical thresholds
during the projection period: the ratio o f debt sewice-to-exports remains well below the threshold in both
the short and medium term (Box 2), while the ratio of debt sewice-to-revenue (excluding grants) i s at the
threshold level. The overall impact o f the construction and operation o f the N a m Theun 2 hydropower
project, included in baseline, on the debt-indicators i s positive.
Indicative
Threshold

2004

2019

Average 20042019

15
20

11.9
19.7

9.3
15

9.5
19.4

'

Percentages
Debt service-to-exports
Debt service-to-revenue
(excluding grants)

Sensitivity analysis shows that the effects of a slowdown in reforms accompanied by slower
44.
export and GDP growth wouldput priority social expenditures at risk. I t would also worsen the ratio of
debt service-to exports to 12 percent in some years, but that would s t i l l be below the threshold. On the
other hand, the ratio o f debt service-to-revenue would reach 25 percent in some years. The risk o f slower
GDP and export growth i s mitigated somewhat b y the planned mining and hydropower investments
provided they remain on track and growth o f mineral export receipts remain on trend.

111.

THE WORLD BANK IN LAO PDR: LESSONS OF EXPERIENCE

45.
The present CAS is firmly rooted in the findings and lessons from operational experience
during the last CAS period, as well as an extensive set of evaluations, reviews, and consultations. These
have included an Operations Evaluation Department Project Performance Assessment Report (2002).
Implementation Completion Reports (ICR), a Bank Quality Assurance Group review o f the Lao PDR
Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) program (2003), and a client survey in 2003 (Box 3). These
have been supplemented with more recent client consultations on lessons learned and future directions for
the new CAS, and a number of other portfolio reviews.
The lending and AAA program under the last CAS has been largely delivered, although with
46.
considerable delays in certain cases. Lending, which had averaged about US$42 million in the early
1990s, fell to US$30 million prior to the 1999 CAS, and with the macroeconomic crisis into late 2000,

- 16f e l l to zero in FYOO. With improved macroeconomic performance and a return to the base case, lending
averaged US$32 million per year between FYOl and FY04. During this period, the World Bank provided
lending for the Agriculture Development and Road Maintenance projects (both in FYO1); a Poverty
Reduction Fund, a Financial Management Adjustment Credit (FMAC) along with a Financial
Management Capacity Building Credit (FMCBC) (FY02); Sustainable Forestry and Land Titling projects
(FY03); and Second Education and Second Road Maintenance projects (FY04). This lending was
supported b y an AAA program that included a Poverty Report, a Country Economic Memorandum,
Banking and Financial Sector Report, Production Forestry Policy, Public Expenditure Review and
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), a Poverty and Environment Nexus Report, a
Mining Sector Note, Economic Monitors, a Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) and
upport to both the Interim PRSP and full PRSP.
Box 3: Findings from Different Evaluations

OED - Project Performance Assessment Report and ICRs. There i s a compelling need for the World
Bank’s project work to be solidly grounded in prior analytic work. In some projects, lack o f donor
coordination, failure to establish outcome and impact indicators, and high turnover o f World Bank task
managers hampered project results. Working with decentralized authorities and communities can be an
effective option in Lao PDR. There needs to be an increased focus on outcomes rather than conditionalities, and
on building broader ownership at the highest levels of government. In principle, the potential for policy reform
through donor leverage i s substantial, with ODA contributing a large share o f government budgetary
expenditure. In practice, donors have not been well coordinated and it has proved extremely difficult to engage
the Government in open discussion on policy.
Q A G A A A Review. The review suggests that the Bank should strengthen dialogue with Lao PDR on broad
development issues; focus more on ownership and capacity issues; develop a stronger mechanism to review and
firm up the annual World Bank program and deliverables; and enhance instruments to promote knowledge and
build partnerships. I t suggests that the new CAS should have a more comprehensive approach to the role o f
AAA in the World Bank’s assistance strategy. AAA should include greater involvement o f the Government and
the donor community. I t should seek to exploit synergies with work done b y others, and explore use o f IDA
grants to complement the AAA program. The review also notes areas of success - N T 2 partnerships, portfolio
management, and successful capacity development in the roads project that should inform design o f the new
CAS.
Client Survey (2003). Financing, donor coordination and building implementation capacity were identified as
the World Bank’s greatest value. Areas identified as important for World Bank involvement included
strengthening infrastructure development, the financial system, the environmental impact of the World Bank’s
program, developing energy sources, and strengthening the regulatory framework. The World Bank i s
perceived positively and i s considered effective, but familiarity with the World Bank i s fairly modest.

47.
The fundamental objectives of the 1999 CAS-reducing poverty, returning the country to a
path of sustained GDP growth of 6-7 percent per year, and improving social indicators-were largely
met, Poverty has lessened significantly, although absolute levels remain high and urban-rural and regional
disparities continue to persist. CAS recommendations for stabilizing the economy and undertaking
structural reforms were not achieved during the first two years o f CAS implementation, but the
macroeconomic stabilization measures put in place in late 1999/2000 were implemented and a program o f
structural reforms began. Growth remained strong overall during the CAS period. Social indicators have
improved, although in many cases at significantly lower levels than needed to meet MDGs.
48.
Dialogue and engagement between Lao PDR and the World Bank have strengthened since the
last CAS, catalyzed by preparation of the NGPES, engagement in the preparation of the Nam Theun 2
(NT2) hydropower project, and government interest in regional integration. During the initial CAS
years o f macro instability, the World Bank canceled the second tranche of the Third Structural
Adjustment Credit and the IMF did not resume a program. The World Bank continued involvement

- 17through AAA and an upgraded field presence. Dialogue and progress on the reform agenda increased,
centered on government preparation of an Interim PRSP (FYO1). Renewed interest in the N T 2 project led
to a resumption o f engagement and the articulation with the Government of a Decision Framework to
guide World Bank support. Likewise, government commitment to regional integration with i t s
membership in A S E A N and AFTA provided an additional impetus for reform. The F M A C supported key
public sector, SOE, and financial sector reforms and Lao PDR met all 17 actions for release o f the second
tranche, establishing a track record o f reform. The World Bank-government relationship and trust have
continued to improve, with government adoption o f an ambitious poverty reduction strategy, the NGPES,
and increasing momentum for implementation o f a wide-ranging reform agenda.

The experiences gained from the implementation and evaluation of the last CAS have provided
49.
a number of important lessons:
Ownership is essential to ensure sustainability) takes time to develop, and requires an open and
well supported dialogue. An informal review o f performance under the 1999 CAS found that
although the CAS and the Government’s National Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP) shared
a common objective of poverty reduction, the Government and the World Bank (and other
International Financial Institutions) differed significantly on development priorities. The Government
priority on food security did not match key CAS emphases on macroeconomic stability and deepened
structural reforms. This mismatch and ensuing macroeconomic instability underscored the importance
o f sustained dialogue to discuss reform options and articulate linkages. Government ownership was
achieved through a sustained dialogue, supported by good analytical work, plus time. This implies a
significant amount of work in the field. The question o f timeframe i s also essential. While the
Government acts quickly when there i s strong commitment, capacity constraints continue to hinder
effectiveness.
Understanding and building on drivers of change have proven important in finding critical levers
of reform. The Government’s strong commitment to the N T 2 project has been a very important driver
o f change over the last two years that has successfully leveraged reforms in other critical areas (Box
4). The World Bank’s participation in supporting the Government has built trust and opened the door
to dialogue in a number o f new areas. Other opportunities and drivers o f change that the World Bank
should continue to support include: the Government’s growing appreciation of, and commitment to,
global and regional opportunities, including i t s desire to j o i n WTO; the growth o f regional markets
and investments; Lao PDR’s interest in keeping up with i t s fast-growing neighbors; the
Government’s commitment to regional cooperation in the M R C and GMS programs; and the
Government’s desire to graduate from the ranks o f LDCs b y 2020 and cut poverty in half as outlined
in i t s NGPES.
Given capacity constraints, capacity development activities should be undertaken using a
comprehensive approach that links capacity to development results. While capacity building
objectives were articulated in past projects supported by the World Bank, the l i n k s between capacity
and development results were unclear. Baselines were rarely identified, making i t difficult to measure
results. Capacity development needs to be defined in terms o f the achievement o f specific,
measurable results with realistic indicators, timeframes, and baselines defined. This approach should
be both opportunistic -- aimed at achieving short-term results, and strategic, gradually addressing
structural weaknesses that can only be overcome over the long term. Government and donor
resources should be aligned with these desired outcomes. This requires a sound understanding of
incentive and governance structures and how these translate into policies, programs, and activities. I t
also means that capacity building objectives must be embedded in national and sectoral strategic
frameworks and interventions at multiple levels-reforms o f organizational processes and incentive
systems, strengthening o f institutions, and individual s k i l l transfer. Attention should also be paid to

’

- 18l o c a l methods; for example, because o f the oral tradition in L a o PDR, written communication and
even lecture-style training i s less effective than an approach o f “learning-by-doing” where n e w
concepts, policies, processes, etc. are explained and then applied in everyday activities.

Box 4: N a m T h e m 2 (NT2) Hydropower Project as a Driver of Change
Beyond hydropower: Hydropower is, potentially, an important driver o f growth and exports,
complementing the Government’s ongoing efforts to promote private investment in the manufacturing,
agriculture and service sectors. N T 2 i s the largest and one o f the most controversial o f these hydropower
projects. N T 2 i s a US$1.2 billion, 1,070 megawatt, private sector project in which the Government o f Lao
PDR has a 25 percent shareholding. The World Bank i s considering supporting the project through a Partial
Risk Guarantee (PRG) o f US$50 million and an IDA grant o f US$20 million that w i l l support social and
environmental mitigation activities to ensure safeguards are met and capacity i s strengthened for
managerial aspects o f the power project. The revenues generated b y N T 2 can make an important
contribution to the Government’s development and poverty reduction agenda if they are well-targeted and
applied transparently and accountably. N T 2 i s expected to contribute 1.2 percent to GDP growth between
2006 and 2010. The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) as well as the ADB and other
donors are also considering supporting the project.
Policy Reform: The Government i s strongly committed to NT2. World Bank participation in project
preparation has opened the door to a constructive dialogue on the development framework with different
stakeholders. I t has also helped build government capacity in various sectors. This had a catalytic impact on
the preparation o f a fully government-owned NGPES and has helped increase the degree o f convergence
between the World Bank and the Government at the policy level. I t has also promoted constructive
dialogue between the Government and the international financial community on investment opportunities
and has strengthened dialogue within the region on the potential for regional cooperation. Cooperation
between the World Bank and Lao PDR, and indeed with the international community, has inspired the trust
and goodwill needed to broaden the dialogue on key issues o f governance, human development and natural
resource management. As a result, the World Bank i s supporting these areas in the new CAS.
Long-term benefits. The primary benefit from the N T 2 project would be the incremental revenues flowing
to the Government for several decades starting in 2009, which w i l l be used to finance additional spending
on priority poverty reduction and environmental protection programs. Implementation o f the N T 2 revenue
management arrangements w i l l also support the broader public expenditure management and governance
reforms, b y requiring programs benefiting from N T 2 revenues to meet transparency and management
standards, including requirements for field level monitoring and stakeholder consultation. Such a large
project could also encourage multinational companies to invest in Lao PDR and enlarge the country’s
access to international financial markets. I t also promotes regional cooperation initiatives. The Government
has chosen to take on N T 2 as a test case, to demonstrate: i t s long-term commitment to sustainable
development in concert with i t s development partners in the international community; i t s willingness to
engage with the local population in designing and implementing a program o f shared benefits at the
national, regional and local levels; and i t s commitment to implement environmental and social safeguards
and conserve i t s natural resources, adopting international standards.

Partnership is essential to achieving successful outcomes and to leveraging change. T h e W o r l d
B a n k contributes only about 10 percent o f total donor assistance. I t i s thus critical that World B a n k
assistance b e supported by strong AAA and used to leverage other resources within a policy r e f o r m
framework discussed and agreed with donors and the Government. Partnerships have been critical in
presenting a c o m m o n message to the Government on macro stability and in articulating macro and
sector strategies. W h i l e partnerships have been steadily improving since 1999, there i s scope for
greater cooperation. T h e World B a n k - A D B cooperation o n the NT2 project i s one such example of
effective collaboration.

Improved presence in the field, analytical work relating to portfolio issues, and more collaborative
reviews greatly improved portfolio performance. T h e portfolio has improved f r o m the worst in the

- 19East Asia region (1999) to having no problem projects in 2002, 2003, and 2004, and one problem
project in early 2005.16 Four factors were key to portfolio health. First, enhanced field presence with
the Country Director based in Bangkok and the upgrading of the Liaison Office to a Country Office
allowed for more direct attention and feedback. Second, analytical work, beginning with the Country
Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) in 2000 and followed by the CPAR and CFAA, highlighted
some o f the major issues facing both the country and project performance. Third, strong field followup on portfolio issues and performance, including quarterly reviews with the Government, gradually
strengthened the capacity to deal with implementation issues on a daily basis. Fourth, as the
Government became more aware of the portfolio issues, there was an improvement in i t s efforts to
monitor donor portfolios (although this s t i l l remains weak). While i t i s important to continue
analytical work and strong collaboration on performance, the focus should now broaden to include
outcomes, as well as making sure that the World Bank’s program (portfolio and analytical work) i s as
effective as possible in helping the Government to achieve i t s development objectives.

50.
Adopting these lessons in the World Bank’s new CAS will mean building on recent successes
and changing the way the World Bank does business in Lao PDR. Especially important to ensuring the
relevance o f the World Bank’s strategy and portfolio w i l l be building relationships with the senior
government leadership to better understand development priorities and internal dynamics. World Bank
AAA and dialogue should be sustained and focused on nationalhector strategies in order to build
agreement on and commitment to key reform priorities. Instruments w i l l be integrated to facilitate key
development results, using strategies that link policy reforms with investments and appropriate
mechanisms for capacity building. The World Bank w i l l need to maintain emphasis on communication
and coordination with development partners, working towards shared strategies, sector wide approaches
(SWAPS), and harmonization (see B o x 5 for one example of a success story).
Box 5: The Road Maintenance Program - A Success Story
Reorienting Strategic Approach. The approval of the Road Maintenance Program (RMP), an eight-year Adaptable
Program Loan, marked a major shift in focus from donor-driven investment to one of harmonized preservation and
sustainable management of road assets. Changing how donors engaged in the road sector, particularly the shift toward a
maintenance “culture,” took several years of active dialogue and analytical work. The program i s now being successfully
implemented by the Ministry o f Communications, Transport, Post and Construction (MCTPC) and supports the
development and implementation of financing and road management systems; capacity development o f public and
private road transport and infrastructure services; and the decentralization of management to provincial and district
levels.
Harmonization of Partnerships. The active cooperation of the main donors involved in the sector, mainly Sweden,
ADB, the Nordic Investment Fund and the Bank, was instrumental for the success of the project. All rallied behind the
MCTPC motto, “One Country - One System,” supporting the development of harmonized systems in financial
management,procurement, reporting and monitoring.
Capacity Building. As part of the RMP, all implementation functions for donor-financedprojects in the road sector were
intemalized within MCTPC’s existing structures and all ad hoc Project Implementation Units (PIU) were dismantled. The
second phase of the RMP will implement a comprehensive Human Resource strategy to institutionalize skills and
processes that are linked to project outcomes.
Leadership - Ownership Results. A committed government management team led the RMP with substantial
participation of the provinces and other stakeholders. Qualified staff were selected and outstanding operational issues are
handled efficiently. MCTPC management demonstrates flexibility in implementation yet remains focused on the
development objectives.

-

l6
The implementationprogress of the Sustainable Forestry for Rural Development Project was rated unsatisfactory in December
2004. The project i s expected to return to satisfactory status once the Govemment addresses some staffing issues affecting project
management.

- 20 IV.
A.

WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

SELECTIVITY AND APPROACH

51.
Selectivity. The CAS has been designed to support the NGPES and within this framework, to
support key areas o f future growth and improved social outcomesheductions in vulnerability. The World
Bank’s AAA program w i l l provide comprehensive but selective support in these two areas based on
lessons learned during the last CAS period, new momentum and strong government ownership o f the
NGPES, growing cooperation among donors, and enhanced dialogue between the Government and the
World Bank in recent years. Greater selectivity w i l l be achieved b y moving to a AAA cycle approach in
which studies are chosen as part o f a process leading to more specific advisory work and lending
operations. There w i l l also be some areas critical to the successful achievement o f CAS objectives where
the World Bank w i l l not be taking a leading role (for example, decentralization policy and civil service
reform) but w i l l be working closely with other development partners through the Donor Working Group
process, and providing AAA support in close coordination with these other partners.
In targeting limited IDA resources on priority areas for World Bank assistance, activities w i l l
52.
focus on areas where:

A strong driver of change exists (such as NT2, government application to j o i n WTO, achieving
ASEAN and AFTA commitments, etc.) to provide an opening for dialogue, analytical work, and
support to the Government to explore important reform options and build ownership and commitment
to a path o f reforms;
The World Bank has a demonstrated track record and/or comparative advantage in global knowledge
and experience that can build confidence and create demand for further change;
There i s sufficient government commitment to reforms; and an institutional entry point exists, with
potential for overcoming capacity constraints that w i l l significantly affect development outcomes;
and.
e

Joint donor resources can be effectively leveraged and b y working together each donor can
contribute according to i t s comparative advantage.

53.
Many important areas w i l l not be supported b y the World Bank during this CAS period due to
limited IDA resources, lack o f government readiness to take action, and/or other strong donor
involvement and comparative advantage, etc. This includes UXO removal where other donors have a
comparative advantage. I t also includes legal and judicial reform and development o f tourism where other
donors andor the private sector are currently working, and large investments in transport infrastructure
because o f the limited availability o f IDA resources.
54.
Approach. The World Bank w i l l recalibrate i t s approach during this CAS period to incorporate a
more explicit emphasis on building capacity. Capacity development i s a central element o f the CAS
approach and each element o f the CAS w i l l address i t in support o f the Government’s implementation o f
the NGPES. Weaknesses in organizational processes and incentive systems as well as in the capacities o f
specific institutions and in the breadth o f individual s k i l l s all severely impede both the public and private
sector in performing key functions effectively. World Bank assistance w i l l focus within each CAS
objective on supporting the identification, prioritization, and removal o f key capacity constraints-that
are vital for achieving poverty reduction and economic and social goals.

- 21 55.

The CAS w i l l also incorporate a stronger, applied effort to build partnerships with all
stakeholders, and especially develop consensus among donors and the Govemment in critical reform
areas. The approach w i l l be implemented through involvement in the newly formed Donor Working
Groups and ensuring as much as possible that AAA and lending activities are carried out in partnership
with government officials, local academics, civil society, and donors. Finally, the CAS w i l l focus
particular attention on the implementation o f N T 2 as a prime example both of the focus on sustaining
growth, improving social outcomes and reducing vulnerability and the emphasis on capacity building and
partnerships.
WORLD BANKGROUPCAS OBJECTIVES AND ACTIVITIES

B.

World Bank assistance w i l l support the implementation o f the NGPES in two substantive priority
56.
areas:

C A S Objective 1:

Sustain growth through improved management o f key drivers-regional
integration and private sector development, rural development, and natural
resource management.

C A S Objective 2:

Improve social outcomes and reduce vulnerability through strengthened
public financial management and service delivery capacities and targeted
poverty reduction programs.

These objectives w i l l be complemented by two further CAS objectives that capture key elements o f the
approach that the World Bank w i l l use to support these substantive priorities:

C A S Objective 3:

Adopt a strategic approach to capacity development and partnerships in
support o f better NGPES results.

C A S Objective 4:

Support implementation o f N T 2 as an example o f an area-based, sustainable
natural resource development program that contributes to growth, social
outcomes, capacity development, and stronger partnerships.

57.
For i t s strong growth record to continue, Lao PDR must integrate economically with its regional
and global partners, improve the enabling environment for Private Sector Development (PSD) and rural
development, and improve management of natural resources. The World Bank w i l l complement other
donor activities b y applying i t s global knowledge and local experience to help the Govemment identify
critical policy and institutional constraints and options for moving forward. Where there are knowledge
gaps and/or lack o f consensus on priority reform options, the World Bank w i l l focus on analytical work
and development o f strategic frameworks. Where there i s greater consensus on development priorities, the
World Bank w i l l also support institutional capacity building, and, in a few cases, investments to fill key
gaps (Table 4). The World Bank i s working closely with other donors in these areas, complementing
and/or jointly undertaking programs with ADB, the European Union (EU), Sweden, Australia, Japan,
France and UN agencies, and w i l l support coordination through the Donor Working Group mechanism
(including co-leading the working group on macroeconomic and private sector development with the
IMF).

- 22 Table : Strengthen Management of Key Drivc s of Future Growth

Longer-term/ higher
order country outcomes
Growth rates o f 6%
maintained.
Export volumes increase
from US$340 million in
2002 to over $550 million
by 2007
Increased private sector
share of GDP

Maintain agricultural
growth rate of 4 to 5%

Diversify and modernize
the agricultural sector
Increase food security
~

Improve govemance and
environmental management
of natural assets

Strengthen the collection
and use of revenues from
natural resources to help
reduce poverty
Maintain productive forest
cover as part of rural
livelihoods

Reduce deforestation rate
Improve rural livelihoods

Expected CAS outcomes in four years
Strengthened enabling environment for the
private sector and for trade
Integratedtrade strategy and action plan
improves trade
Reduced regulatory barriers to private
sector [number of days to start a business
decreases from 198 to less than 100 by
20081
Improved security of land tenure leads to
increased investment
Increased share of credit to private sector
Improved road and power infrastructure
supports regional integration and private
sector development
Strengthened rural sector strategy and improved
enabling environment for rural growth
Improved national and provincial capacity
to assess and develop participatory
strategies to promote rural economic growth
Strengthened opportunities for farmers and
rural communities in selected provinces to
increase productivity and increase trade
More sustainable and participatory management
and conservation of natural resources
Strengthened govemance and management
o f natural resource projects
Strengthened capacity of central, provincial
and district authorities and communities to
manage NRM projects by assessing
environment impacts, managing protected
areas, implementing environmental
regulations
More communities implementing forest
management for improved livelihoods
Strengthened institutional capacity leads to
improved implementation of environmental
and social safeguards in natural resource
projects

Instruments supporting outcomes

Ongoing Projects: FMCBC, Land Titling,
Agriculture Devt, RMP 2, Provincial

Infrastructure

New Lending: PRSCs, NT2, SPRE-2,
Provincial Infrastructure 2, GMS Power Trade
AANOthers: IntegratedTrade Framework,
Joint ADB-Bank InvestmentClimate
Assessment, GMS Power Trade Strategy,
Infrastructure Strategy, PER, Govt.-Donor
Working Groups, Economic Monitors, Joint
economic missions with the IMF

Ongoing Projects: Poverty Reduction Fund,
Land Titling, RMP, Provincial Infrastructure,
Education Development2, Agriculture
Development, Sustainable Forestry
New Lending: Khammouane Rural
Livelihoods, Provincial Infrastructure 2
AANOthers: Khammouane strategy, Rural
Sector Strategy, ICA; IntegratedTrade
Framework, Donor Working Groups
Ongoing Proiects: Sustainable Forestry, Land
Titling
New Lending: NT2, SPRE2, LEnS, NTSEP,
PRSCs
AANOthers: GEF, Environment Monitors,
Rural Sector Strategy, Mekong Resource
Assistance Strategy, Mining Study, Donor
Working Groups

58.
Strengthen regional integration and private sector development. World Bank assistance w i l l
focus primarily on analytical work and policy lending. Analytical work w i l l support articulation o f
strategic frameworks and mechanisms to build synergy between the interventions o f multiple actors,
while Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSC) w i l l support critical policy and institutional reforms.
Capacity w i l l be developed through participatory analytical work (including dissemination) and support
for policy makers to participate in peer networks and south-south dialogue. Donor coordination in the
context of the Macro-PSD Donor Working Group and I F C N e k o n g Private Sector Development Facility
(MPDF) support to the Lao Business Forum (LBF) w i l l provide mechanisms to improve coordination of
trade and private sector initiatives.
a

Promote strategic frameworks to improve regional integration and facilitate trade. The World Bank
w i l l conduct with other partners a Diagnostic Trade Integration Study that w i l l develop an integrated
strategy and action plan to enhance the global integration of L a o PDR, help boost exports, and

- 23 provide donors with a road map for technical assistance and project support. Key reforms, including
the adoption o f AFTA tariffs and measures for W T O accession, w i l l be supported by PRSCs, regional
knowledge-sharing workshops, and support to integration initiatives (such as GMS, MRC, W T O
accession, etc.). These initiatives w i l l complement other donor support from Australia, ADB, UNDP,
France, EU, and UNCTAD. The World Bank w i l l also support analysis o f the social impacts of
regional integration (including issues of migration and spread o f HIV/AIDS) and endeavor to ensure
that the results o f such analysis feed into development o f strategies to enhance the benefits and
mitigate the negative impacts o f greater regional integration and trade.
e

Strengthen the enabling environment for the private sector. A joint ADB-World Bank Investment
Climate Assessment (ICA) as well as other AAA work on provincial business regulations and the

financial sector w i l l assess key constraints and support development o f a PSD action plan to
coordinate key policy and institutional reforms. Based on this AAA work, the PRSCs and the
F M C B C w i l l support implementation of agreed policy actions and programs. I F C N P D F w i l l
complement these reforms with technical assistance (Box 7). Strengthened land titling in urban and
peri-urban areas w i l l provide security and collateral to encourage private sector development (Land
Titling Project supported b y the Bank and Australia), and capacity o f the land administration
institutions w i l l be strengthened. The Economic Monitors and a Country Economic Memorandum
(CEM) w i l l provide key economic information and updates on progress being made on economic
reform.
e

Improve infrastructure services that support regional integration and private sector development.

The World Bank w i l l support targeted infrastructure investments to maintain the quality o f the road
network, increase electrification in rural areas, and facilitate participation in regional power trade.
The World Bank w i l l provide only a small amount o f total investment, but w i l l use this to enhance the
policy environment and leverage more efficient use of government and donor resources. Support w i l l
be provided to improve the financing (development o f rural electrification fund, tariff restructuring,
scaling up o f the road maintenance fund) and management o f infrastructure assets. Capacity o f the
MCTPC to support decentralized management o f roads, and o f Electricite du Laos (EdL) and
Ministry of Industry and Handicrafts (MIH) to manage rural electrification at both central and
provincial levels, w i l l also be enhanced (second phase o f the Road Maintenance Program (RMP-2),
Southern Provinces Rural Electrification-2 (SPRE-2), Provincial and Rural Infrastructure). Lao
PDR’s participation in regional power trade w i l l be facilitated through adoption of regional principles
and best practices for power trading through the N T 2 project, the G M S initiative, and the
establishment o f high-voltage cross-border power connections to Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam,
as well as support for preparation of potential hydropower plants under the GMS Power Trade
Program. This work w i l l complement work b y ADB, China, France, Japan, Sweden and Vietnam and
w i l l be coordinated through the Infrastructure Donor Working Group.

59.
Strengthen institutional capacity to support a diversified and modernized agricultural sector.
World Bank assistance w i l l focus on building capacity o f supporting institutions to: (i)
analyze key
design and
constraints and develop strategies to promote sustained and equitable rural growth; and (ii)
pilot participatory, market-oriented services that support rural development and agricultural productivity.
e

Build national and provincial government capacities to develop and implement strategies that
facilitate broad-based rural economic growth. World Bank assistance w i l l strengthen capacity for

comprehensive, poverty-focused planning. A program o f AAA work on rural development issues w i l l
analyze rural poverty, constraints to long-term rural growth, and policy options. At the provincial
level, the Khammouane Development Study and Khammouane Rural Livelihoods Project (KRLP)
w i l l work closely with the UNDP-supported Governance and Public Administration Reform Program
to build the capacity o f provincial, district and village institutions to analyze opportunities and pursue

- 24 activities and investments to improve rural livelihoods. Capacity of village development committees,
water user groups, and district staff to provide rural infrastructure (latrines, wells) and agricultural
services (including on-farm research, training in monitoring and evaluation (M&E), participatory
rural assessment, dry season cropping) w i l l also be developed under the Agricultural Development
Project (ADP), the KRLP, and the Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF). Coordination w i l l continue with
other donors supporting rural economic growth, such as ADB, Australia, EU, Agence Franqaise de
DCveloppement (AFD) and UN agencies, through the Rural Sector Donor Working Group.
0

Improve the ability of farmers and rural communities to respond to an improving business
environment and trade opportunities. The ADP, KRLP, and N a m Theun Social and Environment

Project (NTSEP) projects, as well as a potential rural development SWAP w i l l strengthen production
capacity at the farm and village levels through extension, field research, rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure as well as community-based production and marketing support investments. Project
assistance w i l l include field research, extension, rural tracks and marketing information systems. This
w i l l be supported by multiple World Bank projects including RMP-2, SPRE-2, PRF, and KRLP, that
contain initiatives to improve rural access to roads, electrification, safe water, and sanitation b y
strengthening the capacity o f national and provincial service providers and increasing 0pportunitie.s
for both farm and off-farm productive activities. Coordination w i l l continue with other donors
supporting overall rural development, such as ADB, Australia, EU, AFD and UN agencies.

60.
Support more sustainable and participatory management and conservation of natural
resources. World Bank assistance w i l l support improved natural resource management in a number of
different sub-sectors - hydropower, mining, and forestry. Support w i l l include assistance to identify and
apply lessons learned from NT2, as well as examples o f best practice in other countries, to other projects
contemplated b y the Government (e.g., other hydropower projects, mining). The World Bank w i l l also
provide assistance to increase resources and capacities to promote environmental conservation, involve
local communities in natural resource management, and strengthen the application o f social and
environmental safeguards in development projects. World Bank activities in all these areas w i l l be
coordinated with other partners through the EnvironmentNatural Resource Management Donor Working
Group.
0

Strengthen overall governance and management arrangements for natural resource management
projects. Based on the N T 2 experience, the World Bank w i l l encourage the Government to

strengthen the framework for private-public partnerships, improve management capacity, and
strengthen public financial management o f major projects. Interventions in the energy sector,
including N T 2 and SPRE-2, w i l l support the restructuring o f the power sector through the
strengthening o f the Lao Holdings State Enterprise (new government shareholding enterprise for
export hydropower investments) and the strengthening o f the framework for small Independent
Power Producers, as well as energy efficiency and conservation goals. The Bank w i l l also support
improved water management in the Mekong basin b y developing Lao PDR’ s administrative
capacities for water resource management through policy advice (in cooperation with ADB and
other donors), the Global Environment Facility (GEF)-funded technical assistance project for the
Commission’s Water Utilization Program, and a regional water strategy. In mining and other
extractive industries, Bank support w i l l be provided based on the recently completed mining
study. Given the growing importance o f mining to the Lao PDR economy and the need to ensure
good governance and management o f revenues streams, the Bank w i l l be discussing with the
Government the potential for implementing the Intemational Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative and w i l l be ready to provide technical assistance through grant funds to assist the
Government to implement the initiative.

-

e

25 -

Strengthen policies and resources to support better environmental and social outcomes from
natural resource management projects. The World Bank w i l l encourage the design o f sustainable

environmental and social policies, as well as build institutional capacity to support their
implementation. The NTSEP and Lao PDR Environment and Social Project (LEnS) w i l l support
strengthened capacities at the central, provincial, district and community levels in environmental
assessment, monitoring and compliance, resettlement planning and implementation, protected
area management, river basin and watershed management, and environmental education and
awareness. Through the proposed Lao Environment and Social Project, the Bank i s collaborating
with the ADB to establish the Lao Environment and Conservation Fund, and build capacity o f
STEA, MAF and selected provinces. This pilot environmental fund for protected area
management in central Lao PDR w i l l be scaled-up in the long term as a permanent entity eligible
to use N T 2 revenues for environmental protection activities. T o help build government capacity
to ensure that mining operations respect the relevant national and international standards with
regard to environmental protection and management, the Bank, through trust funds, recently
funded a review o f the environmental legislation and practices as they pertain to the mining
sector. In future, an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant i s envisaged to assist the
Government to increase i t s capacities for environmental monitoring and assessment. An
integrated GEF ecosystems and wildlife management project i s supporting (with Luxembourg
and MacArthur Foundation) biodiversity conservation in Bolikhmsay Province. Attention to
biodiversity conservation will. continue to be coordinated with bilaterals, UNDP, and Lao-based
international conservation NGOs.
e

Increase sustainability and contribution to local livelihoods by expanding the involvement of
local communities in natural resource management. An integrated package o f assistance, based
on priority areas identified in sector work, co-financed b y the World Bank and the Government o f
Finland, i s supporting improved forest management. The World Bank contribution w i l l focus on

policy and institutional reforms to strengthen support services, implementation o f participatory
management in selected forest areas, and strengthened forestry sector monitoring and control
systems. Capacity development i s embedded in each o f these activities, including initiatives to
strengthen relevant organizational and individual capacities. The Sustainable Forestry for Rural
Development Project i s the primary instrument for World Bank assistance, coordinated with
Finland. With respect to watershed development, NTSEP supports participation b y the local
population in conservation and livelihood activities and i s also focused on the resolution o f social
issues arising from natural resource projects. The Bank w i l l also work with the Government to
access Trust Funds to help reinforce consultative mechanisms with local communities in and
around mining areas and to work with the private mining companies to ensure adequate
community involvement in spin-off projects.
Strengthen institutional capacity to apply social and environmental safeguards to mitigate the
impacts of infrastructure and natural resource projects. Projects including the NT2, NTSEP,

LEnS, SPRE-2, and GMS Power Trade Program have components to strengthen the capacity of
implementing institutions to apply social and environmental safeguards and monitor their
outcomes. These are coordinated with ADB, France, and Japan. The Bank w i l l also apply for an
IDF to help strengthen government capacities at central and provincial levels to adequately
monitor mining sector developments.

- 26 -

61.
Strengthened public financial management and service delivery w i l l be needed in order to
translate sustained growth into improved social indicators. Out of four pillars in Lao PDR’s governance
program (public service reform, public participation, rule o f law, and sound financial management), the
World Bank w i l l focus on public financial management and then analytical work to address pay reform
within the broader area of public service reform. Strengthened Public Financial Management (PFM) w i l l
be critical for ensuring that public resources are more efficiently and transparently managed and that
increased natural resource revenues are channeled to poverty-reducing services. In addition, strengthened
institutional capacities to increase access and quality o f key services and implement targeted poverty
reduction programs w i l l be required. World Bank activities w i l l build upon i t s previous support in
developing a comprehensive public expenditure management program as well as existing and planned
activities to improve service delivery access and quality and reduce vulnerability (Table 5). The World
Bank w i l l continue close collaboration with ADB, EU, UN Agencies, Sweden, Japan and other important
donors in these areas and work closely with the Donor Working Groups on Education and Gender and
Health and HIV/AIDS.
Table 5: Strengthen Public Financial Management, Service Delivery,
and Targeted Poverty Programs

Longer-term/ higher
order country outcomes
Improve public financial
management to increase
efficiency and transparency
to achieve development
goals
Increase alignment o f
public resources with propoor NGPES goals
Reach MDGs and improve
human development
indicators
Improve social outcomes
Improve access and quality
of basic social services

Reduce poverty and
vulnerability in poorest
districts

Expected CAS outcomes in four years

Improved public financial management system and
capacity
Improved alignment of expenditure allocations
with NGPES priorities (MTEF in place)
Improved budgetary compliance and
predictability of expenditure
Publication o f detailed expenditure plans,
budget, budget execution reports, financial
statements and audit reports.
Reduced losses from state-ownedbanks and
SOEs (from Kip 200 billion by 50%)
Improved access to and quality of social service,
especially for the poor and vulnerable in selected
areas
Improved management, allocation and
monitoring o f social sector expenditure
Increased access of the poor and vulnerable
groups to basic health and education services
(800 new classrooms, eight upgraded hospitals in
targeted poor areas)
Improved capacity to train staff and conduct
policy analysis
Development and implementation of policies and
programs for remote, vulnerable groups
Improved analysis and capacity for research and
assessments lead to stronger policies and
approaches to poverty reduction in priority areas
Strengthened development and implementation of
policies and appropriate community driven
development for remote and vulnerable communities
to reduce poverty and increase food security

Instruments supporting
outcomes
Ongoing Projects: FMCBC
New Lending: PRSCs, Public
Financial Management TA
AANOthers: PERs, PETS, PEMSP,
Financial Sector Note, sectoral
expenditure management, WBI
workshops, IDF grants on
procurement and financial
accountability in SOEs and private
enterprises, Donor Working Groups
Ongoing Proiects: Education
Development 2, Poverty Reduction
Fund, FMCBC
New Lending: HealthServices
Improvement Project, Provincial
Rural Infrastructure, PRSCs
AANOthei-s:-Social Protection
Policy Note, PETS, Poverty
Assessment, Social Sector Monitor,
education and healthESW,
PERs, Review of State Audit
Agency, Economic Monitors, Donor
Working Groups
Ongoing Projects: Poverty
Reduction Fund, Land Titling,
Education Development2
New Lending: LEnS; Ethnic Group
Development Plans in projects
AANOthers: Poverty Assessment,
Social Sector Monitor, Gender and
Ethnic Minority Analysis,
Khammouane Provincial Studv

- 27 62.
Strengthen public financial management capacities. Together with the ADB and the IMF, the
World Bank has supported government efforts to develop a comprehensive Public Expenditure
Management Strengthening Program (PEMSP), including a capacity building component that outlines
priority government goals and provides a framework for coordinating donor assistance. Within this
framework, World Bank assistance w i l l focus on strengthening the core public expenditure management
systems, complementing ADB assistance concentrating on audit and accounting systems, strengthening
the State Audit Office, and UNDP assistance (with support from Sweden, Switzerland and the EU) on
provincial financial management. World Bank support w i l l be provided through the PRSCs, the ongoing
FMCBC, the proposed follow-up Public Financial Management TA operation, and a series of Public
Expenditure Reviews (with possible support from Sweden) and Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys
(PETS) (with support from the EU) as well as through support for sectoral expenditure management.
Improve predictability and NGPES alignment of expenditure allocations. World Bank assistance
w i l l support expenditure planning, facilitating a gradual shift in resources to NGPES priorities,

together with a streamlined budget preparation process. During the CAS period, the proportion of
the national budget devoted to health and education, and the share of recurrent expenditures, and
expenditures on primary services, are expected to increase in line with NGPES objectives. The
World Bank w i l l also support analytical work to provide a basis for a coherent, long-term civil
service pay reform policy. Attention w i l l focus initially on the development o f an expenditure
framework integrating pay policy options. Alongside World Bank support to the Ministry o f
Finance (MOF) through AAA work and the PRSCs, World Bank projects in key NGPES sectors
(for example, education and health), w i l l support improvements in public expenditure
management at agency level.

Improve expenditure compliance, predictability and transparency. Policy and capacity
interventions w i l l support strengthening o f the cash management, budgeting, and procurement
systems, consolidation o f treasury functions, and improved financial reporting and compliance,
including provincial revenue and expenditure mechanisms, inter-governmental fiscal transfers,
and more timely payment o f civil servants. In support o f increased financial transparency, the
World Bank w i l l support government efforts to publish detailed budgets, execution reports,
financial statements, and audit reports. This w i l l entail investments in the definition o f
appropriate standards, supporting information systems and the training o f financial management
personnel. This support to be provided through AAA and the PRSCs w i l l be complemented b y an
ADB-funded banking sector reform program and a tax project funded by Sweden.
Reduce losses from state-owned banks and SOEs. Assistance for state-owned banks and
enterprises through AAA and the PRSCs w i l l focus on improving fiscal sustainability-through
continuing reforms in the legal framework, supervision, staff capacity to forestall new arrears,
further strengthening o f credit procedures and other reforms to address underlying causes of

persistent non-performing loans. Close coordination w i l l continue with the ADB banking sector
reform program.

63.
Zmprove social outcomes by increasing access to and quality of basic services, with an
emphasis on vulnerable groups. World Bank support for the social sectors follows a three-pronged
strengthening the public expenditure management framework (see above) to
strategy that focuses on: (i)
increase and improve resource allocation to the social sectors; (ii)addressing system-wide structural
filling in key knowledge and capacity gaps
problems via sector-specific investment loans; and (iii)
through a range o f advisory and technical assistance activities. World Bank assistance w i l l be provided
through the Second Education Development Project, a new Health Services Improvement Project, the
PRSCs, and a range o f analytical work.

- 28 0

Improve allocation and management of social sector expenditures to better support poverty
reduction and social goals. World Bank assistance w i l l support increased allocations to health

and education; improved balance between recurrent and fixed costs; increased share o f budget
allocated to primary services; and strengthened capacity o f education and health ministries to
budget, manage, and monitor expenditures (PRSCs, Health Services Improvement and Second
Education Projects, and PETS). The World Bank w i l l also support measures to rationalize
existing health cost recovery and fee exemption systems to improve access for the poor.
0

Extend access of vulnerable communities to health, education and basic infrastructure services.
The World Bank w i l l support improved primary education access in 19 o f the poorest districts

and access to health care for people living in poor districts o f eight central and southern
provinces. Projects w i l l support construction o f 800 new primary school classrooms, upgrading
and equipping o f central, provincial, and district hospitals and health centers, and provision o f
grant funds to districts and communities for priority health and education needs. The projects will
be coordinated with other donors (e.g., ADB and Japan) also supporting access to basic education
and health care. The World Bank w i l l support increased access o f rural communities to safe
water and sanitation, strengthening o f the Water Supply Authority, and piloting o f alternative
management models for small towns, including increased involvement of the private sector
(Health Services Improvement Project, Second Education Project, PRF, Provincial and Rural
Infrastructure Project). The support w i l l be complemented b y the ADB Small Towns Program
and private sector development projects. Overall coordination with other donors in this area w i l l
continue, including through the Donor Working Groups on Infrastructure, Health and Education.
0

Strengthen health and education institutional capacity to provide pre-sewice and in-service
training systems for health and education practitioners and to improve policy analysis, strategic
planning and monitoring. World Bank assistance w i l l support training for education and health
practitioners at the provincial, district and village levels. In education, the World Bank w i l l

support in-service training for all teachers in participating villages as well as upgrading of
textbooks and teaching guides for primary education. In health, the World Bank w i l l assist in
strengthening and provision o f short-term training as well as strengthening o f the formal medical
education system. Assistance w i l l support increased management capacity o f both the education
and health ministries, including strengthened information management systems, policy and
strategy development, and monitoring o f outcomes and expenditures (Health Services
Improvement Project, Second Education Project, education and health sector strategies, PETS).
The assistance w i l l be complemented by other capacity enhancement projects in the health and
education sectors, supported b y Sweden, EU, ADB, Australia and UN agencies.

64.
Support development and implementation of appropriate policies and programs for vulnerable
and remote communities. The World Bank w i l l support the Government in the implementation of i t s
strategy for community-driven rural development in poor upland districts through enhancing analysis and
capacity for social and cultural research b y the university and other relevant groups (supported b y an IDF
grant, AAA work, and projects); increasing capacity o f MBOs, including the Lao Women's Union and
Lao Front for National Construction, to implement policies that represent their constit~encies;'~and
improving design o f policies and programs and helping in their implementation. The primary instrument
o f the Bank's assistance w i l l be the Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF) with additional support from the
Sustainable Forestry and KRLP projects, and ethnic group development plans.

Such as the Law on Development and Protection of Women and the Ethnic Groups Policy (in collaboration with the UN and

other donors).

- 29 social and cultural research. Assessments on
vulnerability o f upland communities, including the impacts of stabilization, relocation, and
regional integration policies and programs w i l l be conducted jointly with the Government, MBOs
and other donors including Sweden, EU, and UN agencies. These assessments, along with the
Rural Sector Strategy, w i l l contribute to dialogue on viable alternative approaches, including in
situ development to improve local livelihoods and reduce vulnerability. The Land Titling project,
jointly supported b y Australia, w i l l include studies o f cultural land rights and support dialogue
leading to development of appropriate policies for secure access to land for remote upland
communities to be included in the National Land Policy. The World Bank w i l l also support the
Government to analyze lessons learned from participatory implementation o f the PRF, ADP, and
other programs18and then support the Government to integrate good practices into other poverty
fund initiatives targeting the poorest districts (supported b y the PRF, the Poverty Assessment and
regional Community Driven Development monitoring initiatives).
Strengthen analysis and the capacity for

Implement policies and programs to increase food security and reduce poverty and vulnerability
in upland communities. The World Bank w i l l continue to support the implementation o f the PRF.

Through the PRF, upland communities w i l l identify priorities and plan and implement
development projects, including infrastructure, health and education facilities, and other services.
The Sustainable Forestry Project w i l l help to provide secure access to natural resources for upland
communities, and the NTSEP and LEnS projects w i l l support policy reforms to protect vulnerable
upland populations. A more coordinated and participatory approach to ethnic group development
plans w i l l be taken to facilitate country-based dialogue and piloting o f appropriate options, for
example, on language o f instruction and on the use o f traditional cures and medicinal plants.

65.
Successful implementation o f the NGPES i s very much dependent on increased capacity and
improved partnerships among the Government, the private sector, civil society and the donors. Because
o f their crucial importance in the current environment in Lao PDR, the focus on capacity building and
partnerships w i l l be mainstreamed into the World Bank’s assistance strategy (Table 6). A Capacity
Development Strategy has been prepared to set the framework for the World Bank’s approach to capacity
building in Lao PDR (Attachment 2). I t focuses on capacity building at the organizational, institutional
and individual levels and at emphasizing and mainstreaming capacity development in all the World
Bank’s support to Lao PDR. Support w i l l focus on the State Audit Office, MOF, Committee for Planning
and Investment (CPI), Ministry of Education, the financial sector, and environment and social agencies,
among others. The World Bank w i l l also be building on the considerable progress made in recent years in
strengthening donor and other partnerships.
66.
Build relationships with policy makers and help strengthen organizational processes and
incentive systems. The World Bank w i l l endeavor to continue strengthening relationships and
understanding and building trust with policy makers as a basis for a better informed and effective policy
dialogue. In the first few years o f the CAS, and as already highlighted above, the World Bank’s high level
dialogue and support for strengthening the country’s organizational processes and incentive systems w i l l
focus particularly on improving the public financial management system as well as trade and investment
systems and processes. But the World Bank w i l l also be working closely with the Government and other
donors, particularly UNDP, on the overall issue o f decentralization, in part through AAA work and
Projects with similar approaches supported by the EU, IFAD and UNCDF could be included in the analysis,

- 30 lending development for Khammouane province, as well as through more broad-based analytic work. The
World Bank also expects to work closely with the Government and UNDP and other donors on the
overall issue of public sector reform with a particular focus on civil service pay and w i l l be supporting
progress in this area (as well as in the areas o f public financial management, decentralization, and trade
and investment policy) through the series of PRSCs. In addition, through the overall policy dialogue at
the macro and sectoral levels and AAA work, the World Bank w i l l continue to try and deepen i t s overall
understanding o f decision making processes in Lao PDR and the evolving roles o f the legislature, the
executive and the judiciary in order to ensure that policy advice i s grounded in an appreciation of current
realities and i s responsive to the needs o f policy makers.
Longer-term/ higher
order country outcomes
Strengthen capacity to contribute to sustained growth,
poverty reduction, and improved social indicators

Strengthen govemment
capacities for better NGPES

results

Emphasize greater participation in defining and implementing poverty reduction strategy

Create enabling environ-

ment for private sector and
communities to contribute

to growth and poverty reduction

Strengthen coordination
among partners for more
efficient use of donor resources for poverty reduction

Table 6: Strengthen Key Capacities an( 'artnerships
Expected CAS outcomes in four years

Strengthenedrelationships with policy makers
and stronger organizational and incentive systems
Improved trust and policy dialogue relating to
Bank engagement
Stronger national, sectoral and training institutions with better integratedcapacity development

Stronger cross-sectoral govemment capacities to
manage NGPES implementation
NGPES outcomes and actions further prioritized
and integratedwith SEDP
Strengthened monitoring of NGPES/SEDP (integrated with poverty and MDG monitoring) feed
into annual updates
Stronger capacities to develop and implement
priority sector strategies
Strengthened capacity of local training institutions (e.g., NOSPA) to support results-based
management in the civil service and in NGPES
implementation
Public participation in and awareness of
NGPES/SEDP implementation and monitoring
increased
Stronger partnerships with and enhanced capacity of
the private sector, civil society, and communities
Improved understandingof constraints to private
sector development
Greater outreach with civil society and MBOs
Greater involvement with communities
Strengthened donor partnerships
Shared sector strategies developed in key sectors
as basis for effective donor coordination
Implementationof Bank assistance strategy
closely aligned with other major donors
Better alignment of donor resources with
NGPES objectives and strengthened aid coordination

Instruments supporting
outcomes
New Lending PRSCs
AANOthers: Khammouane Provincial Development Study, Investment
Climate Assessment, Integrated
Trade Framework, Decentralization
Study, Economic Monitors
AANOthers: Bank-ADB-SIDA
support for poverty survey, Poverty
Assessment, PETS, Bank-UNDP
support for NGPES implementation,
aid coordination mechanisms; and
monitoring WBI support

Ongoing Projects: Poverty Reduction Fund
AANOthers: InvestmentClimate
Assessment, IntegratedTrade
Framework, IFC/MPDF, MIGA,
Bank's outreach program, shared
AAA and ESW, WBI
New Lending: SWAP (tbd)
AANOthers: Donor Working
Groups, donor consultations, Sector
Strategies, joint AAA and ESW

- 31 67.
Help strengthen national, sectoral and training institutions by better integrating capacity
development into all World Bank supported activities. All CAS instruments - policy and project loans,
sector strategies and AAA - w i l l integrate capacity constraints and political economy issues into the
initial thinking at the concept and preparation stages. Capacity development actions w i l l be firmed up b y
the appraisaVdecision point stages. And progress in improving capacity against agreed indicators w i l l be
monitored carefully as part o f the implementation process and w i l l be evaluated before any new initiatives
covering the same thematic area or institution are undertaken.
e

Strengthen cross-sectoral government capacities to manage the process of deepening and
implementing the NGPES. The World Bank w i l l support capacity development within the CPI
and the M O F to monitor and coordinate NGPES implementation. I t w i l l also support capacity

development workshops for the National Assembly on such issues as NGPES implementation,
costing and budget oversight. In collaboration with the UN and other donors, the World Bank
w i l l continue to support these counterparts to develop and implement a more results-based
management approach to i t s NGPES program by: (i)strengthening capacities to prioritize and
align national development goals (NGPES and MDGs), integrate them into national development
plans (NGPES and SEDP), and align sector strategies and expenditure frameworks with them
(UN agencies, ADB, and bilateral donors); and (ii)
continuing coordination with Sweden and
UNDP to strengthen the National Statistical Center’s ability to monitor NGPES implementation.
Capacity development w i l l also focus on MOF’s PEMSP and the State Audit Office.
e

Strengthen capacities of sectoral institutions at the national, provincial and district levels to
develop and effectively implement sound sector strategies and programs. The World Bank has
already had considerable success in this respect in Lao PDR, particularly in the infrastructure

sector. Going forward, the World Bank intends to build on the progress already made on road
management and financing (with the MCTPC) and on energy (with the MIH and EdL). In
addition, the World Bank w i l l focus particular attention on capacity building with respect to
environmental and social safeguards (building on the N T 2 experience and spreading i t to other
regions); strengthening the capacity o f research institutions to monitor social impacts; and
strengthening the capacity o f the Ministry of Education to target resources to reach vulnerable
groups and to monitor education outcomes and to use monitoring information to inform policy
decisions.
e

Strengthen capacities of local training institutions to support capacity development activities. The
World Bank w i l l support efforts to incorporate new capacity building content and methodology in
key Lao PDR training institutions, including the National Organization for the Study o f Policy
and Administration (NOSPA)19 -- the Government’s primary training school for civil servants.
The World Bank i s assessing the possibility o f providing more support to build NOSPA
capacities in results-based management and NGPES implementation. Tools to be employed
include institutional twinning and other partnership arrangements between senior Lao PDR
government officials, their institutions and counterparts in neighboring countries (especially
China and the H o Chi Minh Academy in Vietnam). Partnerships with institutions from Korea and
Australia are also foreseen. Support i s also being provided to strengthen in-service and preservice training institutions in health and education.

68.
Consult and build partnerships with and help enhance the capacity of the private sector, civil
society and communities. Both the NGPES process and the process for preparing this CAS have involved
a strong level o f consultation with and participation o f the private sector, civil society and the public at
l 9 The NGPES identifies NOSPA as a focal point for supporting capacity development activities supporting NGPES
implementation.

- 32 large. During CAS implementation, the World Bank w i l l endeavor to build on this level o f consultation
and participation and further strengthen contacts with these important groups of stakeholders and, where
feasible, help enhance their capacity and effectiveness.
e

Strengthen partnerships with the private sector. Through the diagnostic trade integration study

and the investment climate survey, the World Bank w i l l be working with the Government and
other donors to better understand the constraints to private sector development and to help put in
place the policies and programs needed to address those constraints. In undertaking these studies,
the World Bank w i l l be working closely with the Lao Business Forum and complementing the
direct capacity building support to be provided to the Forum and to small businesses in Lao PDR
b y I F C M P D F . The World Bank as well as IFC and MIGA w i l l also be working directly with the
foreign and domestic private sectors on investment projects of importance to the country, building
on the very successful N T 2 project example.
e

Consult with civil society and mass-based organizations (MBOs). The World Bank w i l l expand
communications with and outreach to civil society - both the international NGOs based in Lao
PDR as well as the local organizations that are beginning to be established - as well as the local
and foreign media. The World Bank w i l l also strengthen partnerships with organizations such as
the Lao Women’s Union and the Lao Front for National Construction that have critical roles to
play in bringing the voices o f their constituencies into the development and implementation o f the
national economic and social reform agenda.

e

Work with communities. The World Bank w i l l continue to work directly with communities
through the PRF and other ongoing operations to build capacity to plan, prioritize and manage
community investments. The World Bank w i l l also build community involvement directly into
future operations, particularly in areas o f natural resources management and the social sectors.
Special emphasis w i l l be placed on building the capacity o f women to participate fully in
planning and decision making, and more generally in having the s k i l l s needed to participate in a
market economy.

69.
Strengthen donor partnerships for better results. Although IDA resources allocated to Lao PDR
are small relative to the size of overall donor support, the World Bank remains a lead agency in
supporting Lao PDR’s development objectives, and in particular, i t s policy agenda. The World Bank w i l l
further enhance this role during the next CAS period through i t s lending and analytical program b y
actively supporting the Government’s aid coordination efforts through the Round Table process and the
Donor Working Groups and by seeking co-financing and parallel financing opportunities (Box 6).
e

Support government and donor efforts to develop and refine shared strategic frameworks in key
sectors and build agreement on priority policy and institutional reform as a basis for more effective
donor coordination. The World Bank w i l l continue to work with the Government, the UNDP and

other donors to improve the Government’s overall capacity for aid coordination and the effectiveness
o f donor support. During 2003, the Government organized a successful series o f thematic Round
Table Meetings under the PRSPNGPES process. Following on this, in March 2004, donors agreed to
establish a new donor coordination mechanism to support the NGPES. This mechanism consists o f
eight informal sectorauthematic Donor Working Groups consisting o f bilateral and multilateral
donors and NGO representatives and include active government participation. The groups include:
macroeconomic and private sector development; governance; education and gender; health and
HIV/AIDS; infrastructure; rural development; environmenthatural resource management; and drug
prevention. The objectives o f the groups are to: (i)
further policy dialogue with the Government on a
support the respective sectors in the development or
broad range o f sector development issues; (ii)
strengthen dialogue and information
strengthening o f sector strategies agreed b y all stakeholders; (iii)

- 33 sharing among donors with regard to sector-relevant key issues as well as ongoing and planned
projects and programs; and (iv) promote simplification and harmonization among donor procedures in
order to lower the transactions costs and burden o f the recipient country. These groups are now
meeting regularly and are having a positive impact, including in the development o f a Donors’ Matrix
as an immediate tool for the Government and donors to improve coordination and cooperation
(Attachment 4). A widely attended Harmonization Workshop held in February 2005 has also taken
positive steps towards agreeing on the establishment of a Harmonization Action Plan.
Box 6: M a j o r Donor Activities
ADB. ADB i s developing i t s assistance program for the coming years, aligning i t with the NGPES priorities. ADB activities have
emphasized rural development and market linkages; human resource development; environmental management; and private
sector development. The Bank and ADB are working closely together on the NT2 project and more broadly on strengthening
environmental management and social safeguards in the energy sector. The Bank intends to continue close collaboration with
ADB in the areas of support to the Government’s public expenditure management, banking sector reform, health sector, rural
electrification, and SOE reform.
Australia. Australia’s development cooperation with Lao PDR i s framed by a new country strategy that focuses on access to
education, property rights in the transition to a market economy and reducing the vulnerability of poorer communities to natural
disasters. Current key programs include support to the health sector, ASEAN cooperation, prevention of human trafficking, and
integration into WTO. Australia and the Bank are co-financing the second Land Titling project to foster the development of
efficient land markets.
European Union. Aligned with the NGPES, the EU has focused i t s assistance to Lao PDR on rural poverty reduction. Other
main areas of cooperation include health care, institutional support, education and the environment (forest conservation). Good
governance i s a key element of EU support, in particular through i t s support to the legal sector and public administration system.
The Bank will work closely with the EU in co-financing PRSC 2 and support to the public expenditure management reform
process.
France. France i s primarily supporting electrification network improvements in Vientiane, a capitalizationprogram for assistance
to rural development policy implementation, and basic education. In addition to working closely together on and co-financing the
NT2 project, i t i s expected that the Bank and AFD will continue to collaborate closely and agree on co-financing support for rural
development and public expenditure management capacity building.
IMF. The Bank collaborates closely and regularly with the IMF on macroeconomic developments, the fiscal framework and
public sector reforms, the financial sector, investment regimes, and poverty. The two institutions co-chair the Donor Working
Group for Macroeconomics and Private Sector Development and produced the JSAN for the NGPES in November 2004. Lao
PDR will be under the Fund’s Surveillance when the current PRGF program ends in April 2005.
Japan. Through the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) grant facility, Japan provides significant support for
improvement o f transportationinfrastructure; strengthening of the primary and higher education system; public health, especially
through support for medical technology; human resource development; and the legal sector and public investment plan
management.
Sweden. Sweden provides key support for strengthening of the legal sector, the public administration reform process and the
promotion of human rights. In alignment with the NGPES, other focus areas include support for education, rehabilitation of
national roads and strengthening of the national statistical system. The Bank and Sweden are jointly promoting sustainable
preservation of the national road network by developing, implementing and co-financing the Road Maintenance Fund facility.
The Bank will continue to work closely with Sweden to support a more coherent statistical system and improved governance.
United Nations. UNDP supports the Government in aid coordination efforts and, with other UN agencies, provides assistance to
key capacity and institutional building efforts. The UN system i s helping the Government develop and monitor Lao MDGs. The
UN agencies also provide support in governance and strengthening of the legal sector, prevention of drug production, UXO
operations, health management, HIVIAIDS prevention and primary education in remote areas. As an active member of the UN
Country Team, the Bank works closely with the UN agencies in aid coordination, alignment of support with the NGPES and
MDGs and on various aspects of the governance reform program. The Bank also works with the UN Coordinator and UNDP
Representative, in particular in aid coordination and major donor-government consultations, governance and financial
management.

0

Ensure that the implementation of the Bank’s assistance strategy is closely aligned with other
major donors in Lao PDR (most notably Japan, ADB and the UN system). Building on the

example of the NT2 project, which has been a model o f cooperation and coordination among five
different donors (ADB, AFD, the European Investment Bank (ED), the Nordic Investment Bank
(NIB), and the World Bank Group), the World Bank w i l l be endeavoring to leverage the

- 34 relatively modest resources available to i t for analytic work and lending by working much more
closely with other donors. This w i l l involve doing much more o f the AAA work jointly, as i s
happening currently for the integrated trade work (which involves the IMF, WTO, and U N C T A D
as well as donors under the overall coordination o f AusAid) and the investment climate
assessment work which i s being led by ADB with support from the World Bank. With respect to
policy based lending, a number of donors are already involved jointly with the World Bank in the
policy dialogue and have indicated their interest in co-financing future PRSCs. And in the case o f
investment lending, the World Bank w i l l be encouraging the Government and other donors to
move as quickly as possible to SWAps to their implementation support in the context of agreed
and government-owned sector strategies and programs. As part of these SWAps, the World Bank
w i l l be supporting harmonization of project implementation processes, as appropriate. These
efforts w i l l require active World Bank involvement in and support for the Round Table process
and the sectorallthematic Donor Working Groups at the country level as well as engagement with
the headquarters of specific donors, as i s already happening, particularly in the case o f Japan and
the ADB.

70.
N T 2 i s a top L a o PDR development priority and a core element o f World Bank assistance. The
N T 2 hydropower project i s a US$ 1.2 billion (which could increase to US$1.4 billion with contingencies),
1,070 megawatt, private-sector project (in which the Government has a 25 percent shareholding). The
project allows Lao PDR to export electricity to the Electricity Generating Authority o f Thailand while
also producing 75 megawatts of electricity for domestic use. I t i s estimated to generate government
revenues o f an average o f US$28 million in the first five years, rising to an average o f US$33 million
from 2015 to 2019, and rise sharply thereafter to an average o f US$73 million from 2020-2024. N T 2
could provide significant incremental monies to support Lao PDR’ s poverty reduction, human
development and environmental management goals if the additional revenues are well targeted.
71.
The preparation of the project has expanded and strengthened the dialogue between Lao PDR and
the development community on a wide range of development issues and has served as a catalyst for
formulation o f the NGPES and progress on a range of development issues. The implementation o f the
N T 2 project w i l l contribute to the attainment o f all o f the previous three CAS objectives (Table 7). I t w i l l
contribute to sustained economic growth through further regional integration and more sustainable natural
resource management. I t w i l l develop government capacity in public financial management to ensure that
revenues w i l l be targeted in areas that w i l l improve social outcomes. I t w i l l strengthen central, provincial,
and district management capacities in managing large infrastructure investments, utilizing participatory
approaches, and monitoring and build stronger partnerships among all concerned stakeholders. The
project does, however, entail development risks that need careful management. I t also poses reputational
risk for the World Bank, given the expectations i t has raised as being a model for sustainable
development. T o ensure close collaboration during implementation among the five different donors
supporting the project, the donors have agreed on a set o f Partnership Principles to guide their
collaboration (Box 7).

- 35 Box 7: Implementation of Lao PDR Nam Theun 2 Project:
Multilateral and Bilateral Partnership
The purpose of the partnership i s to improve the quality o f donor support for the implementation o f N T 2 and
thereby enhance its contribution to Lao PDR’s NGPES.
The aim of the partnership i s to:
0
support the Government’s implementation framework for the N T 2 project b y strengthening and harmonizing
donor support;
0
promote trust and transparency between the Government, stakeholders, and donors involved in the project,
and the international community;
0
focus on government and developer implementation performance on the project, particularly on managing
project risks; and,
0
strengthen donor dialogue with the Government and other stakeholders b y coordinating supervision
missions, systematically consulting civil society and project-affected persons, organizing periodic donor
meetings, and reporting progress to the Round Table mechanism led b y the Government and supported by
UNDP.
The Partnership will be driven by the following principles:
Promoting Donor Synergy: Exploit relative institukonal strengths; work together through dialogue and
analytical activities to understand the evolving project context in all i t s dimensions (e.g., technical, financial,
economic, environmental, social, revenue management); share assessments; adopt common project
monitoring and evaluation arrangements; avoid duplication in supervision efforts; seek complementarity in
financing o f future initiatives that expand the development impact o f the N T 2 project in areas such as
energy/hydropower development, river basin management, strengthening o f environmental and social
safeguards, improving rural livelihoods.
Improving Communication with Stakeholders; Build open relationships with the wide range o f project
stakeholders; show willingness to share appropriate project information with the Government, other donors,
civil society and project-affected persons; reinforce government initiatives to listen to the voices o f the poor
particularly bearing in mind language barriers; and, provide feedback to communities after consultations.
Strengthening Assessments of Project Performance: Establish common standards and understanding on
assessment o f government and other stakeholder performance on the project through effective M&E
arrangements; share information with the Government and among the stakeholders, including projectaffected persons, concerning project risks as they are handled or emerge, including those caused by
deviations from project legal and other arrangements; and work towards a common approach for resolution
o f the issues.
Highlighting the NT2-NGPES Nexus: Monitor closely the impact o f N T 2 on achieving the Government’s
NGPES objectives; hold periodic donor meetings; keep the broader donor community and civil society
informed on progress inter alia through the Round Table mechanism led b y the Government and supported
b y UNDP; and contribute to a shared view among donors on future dimensions o f assistance in support o f
NGPES .

Implementation of NT2 will contribute to sustained economic growth, including greater
72.
regional integration and more sustainable natural resource management (CAS Objective 1).
0

NT2 demonstrates technically sound and financially viable natural resource development that
reflects equitable sharing among international and local stakeholders o f the revenues generated
and risks posed by natural resource exploitation. The World Bank w i l l support and monitor the
project to ensure compliance with international standards and implementation that meets financial
and revenue targets. Financing o f N T 2 and assistance for supervision and monitoring o f i t s
implementation w i l l be provided through the N T 2 Guarantee, the NTSEP, the KRLP, and the
Khammouane Provincial Development Study. The D a m Safety Panel o f Experts and the
International Advisory Group w i l l continue to monitor construction and safeguards.

- 36 -

Longer-term/ higher
order country outcomes
Implement NT2 as an
example of sustainable
natural resource
development that
contributes to poverty
reduction

Target natural resource
project revenues towards
social outcomes

Improve capacity to
manage complex
multisectoral program in a
participatory manner, and
strengthen partnerships
among all concerned
stakeholders

Table 7: Support Implementation of N'.
Expected CAS outcomes in four years

Instruments supporting

NT2 implementation contributes to sustained growth,
regional integration, and sustainable natural resource
management
0
NT2 demonstrates socially and environmentally
responsible natural resource management:impacted
villages moved into developedresettlement sites
with planned infrastructureand social services in
place; affected persons and villages compensated
for lost assets; numbers of key wildlife species
stable or increased; water quality at acceptable
levels
Satisfactory progress on construction reported by
independent monitoring and evaluation consultant
Strengthenedcapacity of central and provincial
authorities to oversee construction of hydro projects
to intemational standards, promote regional trade
Revenue and expenditure mechanisms in place to ensure
transparent, accountable, well-targeteduse once NT2
revenues come on stream
Eligible programs for NT2 revenues identified in
NGPES successor, FYOS budget and MTEF; key
performance indicators defined by 2008.
Financial systems in place to ensure that resource
allocations to eligible programs can be monitored
and impact assessed; public expenditure reviews
and tracking surveys conducted and published as
scheduled
Strengthened institutional capacities to manage and
coordinate complex natural resource projects and
facilitate participation of all stakeholders in monitoring
and implementation.
Continued dialogue and participation of local and
international stakeholders in NT2 implementation
and monitoring; continued involvement o f
International Advisory Group, Panel of
Environmentaland Social Experts; regular
consultation with communities in project area

New Lending: NT2 Guarantees,
NTSEP, KRLP, LEnS, PRSCs,
GMS Power
AANOthers: Khammouane
Provincial Development Study,
PETS, PEMSP, PER, Round
Table Meetings, Donor Working
Groups

outcomes

Ongoing Projects: FMCBC
New Lending: PRSCs, project
components to strengthen
financial management of key
service delivery sectors
AANOthers: PEMSP, PER,
PETS, Round Table Meetings,
Donor Working Groups

New Lending: NT2 Guarantees,
NTSEP, KRLP, PRSCs, GMS
Power, SPRE 2
AANOthers: Round Table
Meetings, Donor Working Groups

NT2 demonstrates socially and environmentally responsible natural resource development and
builds capacities to apply social and environmental safeguards. The World Bank w i l l provide
intensive support to build government capacities for applying environmental and social
safeguards in support o f the N T 2 program as well as more broadly in other parts o f the country.
Capacity development objectives include: (i)institutionalizing the Watershed Management and
Protection Authority to improve management o f the Nakai N a m Theun Protected Area, with an
initial focus on improving capacities in: biodiversity assessment, patrolling and monitoring
wildlife poaching and logging, and community participation and livelihoods development; (ii)
building the capacity of Khammouane Province to ensure that social and economic impacts are
mitigated in NT2 related resettlement, including efforts to build N G O capacity to support villageimproving the capacity
level planning and delivery o f livelihood programs and services; and (iii)
of the Science, Technology and Environment Agency to monitor environmental compliance with
NT2. The LEnS w i l l complement the NTSEP b y addressing capacity and policy issues at the

- 37 national level, including strengthening broader government capacities to apply environmental and
social safeguards to other natural resource projects.
0

NT2 contributes to expanded Lao PDR participation in regional economic cooperation and

bilateral power trade, increased foreign investment and effective private-public partnerships for
large-scale hydropower projects. The World Bank w i l l continue to encourage regional initiatives,

particularly through Mekong mechanisms. I t w i l l continue its involvement in the electricity sector
through the Southern Provinces Rural Electrification project, which also supports national-level
institution building.

73.
NT2 mechanisms are in place to ensure that expected revenues contribute to increases in
spending on priority poverty reduction and environmental protection programs, and ultimately to
strengthened service delivery and improved social outcomes (CAS Objective 2). The Government’s
PEMSP w i l l put in place the key instruments for ensuring that N T 2 revenues are transparently allocated in
line with objectives laid out in the N T 2 Decision Framework over the longer term (Box 4). The
Government has agreed to specific N T 2 revenue and expenditure management arrangements to be applied
from the time o f project commissioning (currently estimated as 2009), that w i l l provide additional
assurance that revenues specific to N T 2 are applied transparently in financing additional spending on
poverty reduction and environmental programs.
0

Revenue and expenditure management arrangements w i l l be put in place to ensure transparent,
accountable, and well-targeted use of NT2 revenues. The Government has committed to: a set of

criteria for selection of poverty reduction and environmental programs to benefit from N T 2
revenues; a basis for verifying that N T 2 resources provide additional financing for these
programs and do not substitute for financing from other sources; the flow o f funds through a
dedicated Treasury N T 2 Revenue Account, so that the transfer of revenues to the central treasury
account can be verified and the Ministry o f Finance can withhold funds from programs that fail to
comply with selection criteria and transparency standards; and a monitoring schedule to assess
progress in implementing these arrangements and the impact o f N T 2 financed spending. These
monitoring arrangements w i l l require a significant commitment under the CAS to regular public
expenditure reviews, public expenditure tracking surveys and peer reviews o f the State Audit
Organization. The costs o f monitoring NT2 revenue management arrangements w i l l be shared
between N T 2 project financing partners.

74.
NT2 will contribute to improved management capacity at central, provincial, and district
levels as well as to more effective partnerships among all concerned stakeholders (CAS
Objective 3).
0

NT2 implementation supports improved capacities of central, provincial, and district authorities

to manage complex infrastructure and natural resource projects, to contribute to local
livelihoods, and to mitigate environmental and social impacts. The comprehensive approach to

the preparation of N T 2 has contributed greatly to strengthening the power sector’s capacity to
manage large and complex infrastructure projects. The implementation phase of the project w i l l
further strengthen the power sector to handle future projects o f this nature, and capacity w i l l be
developed to conduct and apply the findings o f environmental assessments, resettlement action
plans, ethnic minority development plans and other related instruments in the hydropower sector.
Continued dialogue and participation of local and international stakeholders in NT2. The
preparation of the N T 2 project has involved extensive and intensive consultations with local
communities. This process w i l l be continued as part o f project implementation. In addition, the
project i s supported b y a strong and independent M&E arrangement and close oversight by the

- 38 Panel o f Environmental and Social Experts and the Dam Safety Panel o f Experts. Multilateral and
bilateral co-financiers have entered into a partnership agreement that streamlines support for the
Government’s implementation framework for the N T 2 project. Under this partnership (Box 7),
annual meetings o f co-financiers are planned, to be followed up b y information-sharing meetings
under the auspices of the Round Table process with the Government, donors and civil society.
These efforts w i l l be complemented b y several measures taken b y the lenders and partners
including: systematic monitoring o f the technical and safeguards components of the project and
i t s impacts b y one or more professional f i r m s on behalf o f the private and public sector financial
institutions; regular supervision b y staff o f the World Bank, the ADB and other development
partners; and visits from the International Advisory Group that advises senior World Bank
management.

c.

WORLD BANKASSISTANCEPROGRAM

The World Bank will take an integrated approach in its country assistance program in Lao
PDR by combining various instruments to effectively support the CAS Objectives based on client
priorities and lessons learned. World Bank support during the CAS period w i l l include a mixture of
programmatic and investment lending and an important program o f analytical and advisory services. In an
effort to maximize limited IDA resources, strategic and participatory economic sector work and technical

75.

assistance w i l l be complemented b y a series o f PRSCs to support cross-sectoral policy reforms. Given
Lao PDR’s low income and considerable debt burden, the majority o f IDA resources w i l l most likely be
provided as grants. These resource flows, along with those from other donors and international financial
institutions, w i l l help to fill the country’s external financing gaps, which are projected to continue in the
medium to longer term, as well as help finance priority investments and expenditures.

76.
AAA will provide the analytical underpinnings for policy dialogue, the development of joint
government and donor frameworks, the design of the lending program and technical support, and the
basis for implementing the CAS Objectives. The AAA program w i l l be closely linked to the CAS
Objectives to ensure a coherent and practical set o f instruments to promote knowledge and build
partnerships. A comprehensive project-cycle type approach that systematically engages the client and
development partners throughout the AAA cycle w i l l be instrumental in building capacity and ownership.
Diagnostic work w i l l be undertaken collaboratively with government counterparts, donors, and local
researchers to build capacity and consensus around key policy outcomes. The East Asia and Pacific
Region’s AAA cycle approach w i l l guide these exercises. A balance o f core diagnostic Economic and
Sector Work (ESW) w i l l be supplemented by analytical work in key sectors.

77.
AAA will focus on four thematic areas (PSD/Regional Integration; Rural
Development/Natural Resource Management; Public Financial Management; Service Delivery and
Vulnerability) as well as several cross-cutting products which support the CAS Objectives (Table 8).
Proposed activities for PSDRegional Integration include the Private Sector Assessmenthvestment
Climate Survey, Financial Sector Assessment, CEM, Economic Monitors, Infrastructure Strategy and
technical support to the Government’s regional integration efforts through updating the Integrated Trade
Framework. Strengthening public expenditure/financial management w i l l benefit from a series of
integrated Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs) and PETS, a Contract Value Norms Study, a peer review
of the State Audit Organization, and technical assistance on Public Procurement.
Rural
DevelopmentLNatural Resources Management activities w i l l include sector policies for Rural
Development, the Mekong Resources Assistance Strategy, and Environment Monitors. The Khammouane
Provincial Development Study w i l l also supplement studies related to the NT2 project, looking at a
broader range of institutional, social and economic development issues in the province and feeding into
follow-up projects. Improvements in social outcomes from work on service delivery w i l l include a Social
Protection Policy Note, Education and Health Sector Strategies, a Poverty Assessment, a Gender and

- 39 Ethnic Minorities Assessment, technical assistance for education and health service delivery, integration
o f ethnic minorities’ concerns in the PRSP, and monitoring and evaluation in education. Cross cutting
work such as the studies on decentralization policy and civil service reform have been scheduled to follow
up on policy decisions arising from the forthcoming IDF grants w i l l be sought regularly to support the
main priorities in the four thematic areas and the World Bank Institute (WBI) w i l l continue to support
project preparation in trade and private sector development as well as in local capacity to achieve PRSP
priority results.
T a b l e 8: L a o PDR: Proposed Analytical and Advisorv Activities (AAA)
Public Financial Management
Private Sector Development and Regional
Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS)
Integration
Assessment o f Provincial Business Regulations
PSNInvestment Climate Assessment and
follow-up
Integrated Trade Framework
CEM
Infrastructure Strategy
Financial Sector Strategy
Economic Monitors

Rural Development and Natural Resources
Management

Rural Sector Strategy
Khammouane Provincial Development Study
Mekong Water Resource Assistance Strategy
Environment Monitors

Integrated PER-CFAA-CPAR
Peer Review o f State Audit Organization
Contract Value Norms Study
Efficiency in Public Procurement (IDF)

Service Delivery and Vulnerability

Poverty Assessment
Social Protection Policy Note
Education Sector Study
Health Sector Study
Gender and Ethnic Minorities Assessment
Ethnic Minorities concerns in PRSP (tbc-

IDF)

Monitoring and Evaluation in Education
(tbc-IDF)
Social Sector Monitors

Cross-cutting Lctivities

Civil Service Reform Study
Decentralization Study

A key instrument of the Bank’s assistance will be a series of Poverty Reduction Support Credits
(PRSCs). As a core Bank instrument, the PRSCs w i l l enable sustained dialogue, coordination and
progress on key elements o f the Government’s reform agenda.20 The Government has now adopted an
important Public Expenditure Management Support Program, which has been developed over the last
several years in close consultation with the World Bank, the IMF, and the ADB, among others. The
PRSCs w i l l support institutional incentives that improve organizational capacities, particularly in public
expenditure management, financial sector and SOE performance, public spending with NGPES poverty
reduction priorities, PSD, regional integration, natural resource management, and monitoring and
evaluation. The PRSCs w i l l be single tranche budget-support operations that w i l l become effective and
disburse on the ex-ante fulfillment o f an agreed set o f prior actions. Their design w i l l emphasize
alignment with country priorities, simplicity, consultations and participation (including with civil society

78.

*’Past dialogue on the preparation and implementation of the FMAC was very important to achieving and developing a track

record on reforms. PRSCs provide an instrument to sustain dialogue and progress on these key reform fronts, including public
expenditure management and SOE reform, as well as in new areas such as service delivery, the enabling environment for regional
integration, and private sector development. Although CPIA ratings score low in a number of areas important for policy-based
lending, Lao PDR’s outcome performance measures (consistent growth and poverty reduction performance) have been strong.
PRSCs will provide the main platform for Bank support to incremental policy reforms across sectors that are important for
achieving NGPES goals over the CAS period.

- 40 and other stakeholders), partnerships and co-financing, and pay special attention to implementation
capacities. The sequencing o f the PRSC program i s diagrammed below (Figure 4). I t i s expected that
PRSCs w i l l be implemented annually during this CAS period (although the components o f a PRSC-4
have yet to be discussed and agreed upon), supporting a programmatic series o f actions based on three
pillars: the first, addressing key reforms scheduled under the Government’s PEMSP; the second,
addressing sector reforms aimed at shifting resources in support o f basic social services and
improvements in service delivery management at the sector level; and third, enhancing the environment
for revenue generation through a stronger private sector, expanded trade, and greater capacity to manage
natural resources.

Figure 4: Evolution of Lao PDR PRSCs

PRSC-1
PEM

Human
Development

.1 Strengthened Public
Expenditure Management
Capacity
.2 Enhanced Commercialization
and Transparency of
Banking Sector
.3 Restructuring of StateOwned Enterprises
.4 Financial Sustainability of
Utilities through Tariff
Restructuring/Efficiencty
Improvements

PRSC-2
11.1
1.2
-b
1.3
1.4

Public Exp. Management
Banking Sector
State-Owned Enterpr.
Financial Sustainability
of Utilities

-

I

2.1 Align Spending with
Pro-poor Priorities
(expanded access, pay
reform)
(A. Health; 6 . Edu; C. Infrastr.)
2.2 Monitoring spending and
enhanced data
transparency and
accountability

PRSC-3

I1.1

Pdb,ic Exp. Management
1.2 Banking Sector
1.3 State-Owned Enterpr.
1.4 Financial Sustainability
of Utilities

I

2.1 Align Spending with
Pro-poor Priorities
(A. Health; B. Edu; C. Infrastr.)
2.2 Monitoring 2.1

3.2 Liberalization of trade
for Regional & Global

Growth

79.
PRSCs will focus on critical public sector reforms to strengthen accountability and efficiency
of public expenditure management, and improve allocation of public resources to pro-poor
development priorities. As such, they w i l l complement other World Bank instruments of support. PRSCs
w i l l be particularly important in strengthening the framework within which the NT2 project can have the
greatest benefit for Lao PDR through efficient allocation and use o f public revenues for priority poverty
reduction and development objectives. PRSCs also provide a meaningful tool for strengthening donor
coordination. The PRSCs w i l l further contribute to a broad-based approach to capacity enhancement,
linking policy and institutional reforms with project-based lending and technical assistance.” U n t i l the
PRGF i s resumed, World Bank staff w i l l provide an update o f the macroeconomic conditions as part o f
the PRSC documentation in consultation with the IMF. This w i l l be based on Bank staff participation in
the two IMF missions each year, and additional quarterly Bank staff monitoring o f revenue performance,
revenue measures, as well as bank credit growth.

80.
Investment lending, in selected sectors supporting NGPES priorities and in collaboration with
other donors, will emphasize Sector Wide Approaches (S WAps) wherever appropriate. SWAps w i l l be
particularly useful given the multiplicity o f donors and need for harmonization among them, as well as
Until the IMF’s PRGF i s resumed, World Bank staff will provide explicit macroeconomic assessments as part of i t s
documentation for the PRSC. T h i s will be based on staff participation in the two IMF missions each year, quarterly staff
monitoring and dialogue on revenue collection in particular, as well as the provision of all macroeconomic information from the
Government, including quarterly data on the fiscal, monetary and external accounts of Lao PDR.
21

- 41 their intention to align support to poverty priorities. SWAps also provide a means for the World Bank to
leverage i t s own resources in partnership with others. However, a key precondition i s the adoption by the
Government and other major stakeholders o f shared sector and sub-sector strategies, and the commitment
to a multi-year programmatic framework. Recent experience in the roads sector provides a useful example
o f how this can be achieved.
Year
FY05

l l

0
0
0

FY06
0

FY07
0
0

FY08

0
0

Lending
PRSC-1
N T 2 Social & Environment Project
Lao Environment and Social Project
N T 2 Guarantee
PRSC-2
Health Services Improvement-2
Southern Provinces Rural Electrification-2
PRSC-3
Khammouane Rural Livelihoods Project
Public Financial Management TA
GMS Regional Power Trade
PRSC-4
Sectoral SWAP (tbd based on progress in different sectors)
Provincial and Rural Infrastructure SWAP

8 1.
Znvestment operations will be strategic and results-oriented. New investments w i l l focus on
strengthening social and infrastructure services (Health Services Improvement 2, potential Education
SWAp, N T 2 guarantee, SPRE 2, potential Provincial and Rural Infrastructure SWAp, and investment in
the regional GMS program); environmental protection and conservation o f Lao PDR’ s unique
biodiversity (NTSEP, LEnS); and rural development and enhancing rural livelihoods (potential Rural
DevelopmentlAgriculture SWAp, KRLP). In particular, during the f i r s t years o f the CAS period, IDA
lending/grants w i l l focus on key operations-including the PRSCs-to support the N T 2 development
framework and the associated social and environmental measures and their implementation. The NTSEP,
using an IDA grant, w i l l help fund part o f the government equity in the project. A key feature o f all
operations w i l l be the mainstreaming o f capacity development according to the guidelines and framework
developed in partnership with WBI. A Technical Assistance Creditlaant w i l l further support the ongoing
strengthening of public financial management (Table 9).
82.
The World Bank will provide additional support to the NT2 hydropower project through a
Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) in partnership with MZGA and other donors and agencies (ADB, AFD,
NIB, and EZB). The PRG w i l l mitigate specific risks relating to political, regulatory and governmental
performance, and debt service default resulting from activities and actions under the Government’s
control: expropriation; the issuance and renewal o f permits for construction and operation; changes in
laws, taxes and duties; other specific obligations o f a sovereign nature defined in the Concession
Agreement and other related agreements, and deemed critical for obtaining finance; and force majeure
events that are beyond the control o f the developers. The private sector developers and financiers have
indicated that they are not able to absorb, manage or insure such risks and therefore would need a political
risk mitigation package to be able to support the project. The risk coverage under the IDA guarantee

- 42 would m i r r o r that of a n IBRD “enclave” guarantee: the lenders and sponsors w o u l d take the T h a i
sovereign risk, including the payment f o r electricity delivered under the terms of the Power Purchase
Agreement. T h e IDA PRG w o u l d n o t create any additional liabilities for the Government since it backs
the commitments already made in connection w i t h the project.

83.
M I G A will support the NT2 project through the provision of a US$50 million political risk
insurance instrument and can provide similar guarantees for other private sector investments and FDI.
MIGA i s also considering providing up t o US$lOO m i l l i o n o f additional cover for T h a i political risk t o the
project. L i k e the PRG, the MIGA guarantee w i l l mitigate specific risks relating to political, regulatory and
governmental performance, and debt service default resulting from activities and actions under the
Government’s control. MIGA also provides investment marketing services to L a o PDR through i t s onl i n e investment promotion services featuring 75 documents on investment opportunities and the related
legal and regulatory environment in L a o PDR.
84.
IFC and other World Bank Group agencies (e.g., the Foreign Investment Advisory Service
(FIAS) , M P D F ) will assist in the achievement of the CAS objectives, particularly by strengthening the
r o l e of the private sector and the investment and business climate to foster poverty-reducing growth.
IFCMPDF activities are detailed in Box 8.
Box 8. IFC in Lao PDR

MPDF. IFC’s primary engagement in Lao PDR has been through the Mekong Private Sector Development Facility
(MPDF), with selected direct investments in key sectors such as tourism and wood processing. MPDF, a multidonor funded initiative, managed and supported b y IFC, promotes the development of small and medium
enterprises in Vietnam, Cambodia and Lao PDR.
IFC investments. IFC’s willingness to lend to smaller projects has been a catalyst for unlocking local credit, and
encouraging co-lending b y other development institutions. To date, IFC has extended loans worth US$2.33 million
to two hotel projects and US$0.92 million to two small manufacturers. I F C i s considering investments in
telecommunications and other key infrastructure areas.
Support to individual enterprises. IFC’s MPDF started i t s operations in Lao PDR in 1999, with assistance to
individual enterprises. The Facility continues to help local privately-owned small and medium enterprises (SMEs)
to upgrade human resources, improve operations, and prepare viable projects to obtain financing, but it i s now
focusing particularly on the agribusiness sector and helping NGOs to turn their income generation projects for
disadvantaged groups into viable business that can sustain themselves without donor support.
Access to finance. To increase access to finance, IFC/MPDF has been working with Lao PDR banks to develop
the capacity o f bank credit officers to assess the businesses and proposals o f SME borrowers, to restructure nonperforming loans, and to improve the profitability o f the SMEs whose loans have been restructured. S M E s that are
ready for international financing are also being helped to apply for this.
Training SME managers. T o address the needs o f local S M E ownedmanagers for managerial training,
IFC/MPDF has developed and published Lao language self-study workbooks on marketing and human resources
development and has trained local trainers to offer four one- and two-day seminars on caring for customers,
motivating people, controlling costs and working with budgets.
Improving the capacity o f business associations. As part o f i t s program to build stronger business associations,
IFC/MPDF i s working with the Lao Hotel and Restaurant Association to improve member services. This includes
establishing and maintaining an e-commerce Internet portal that enables a number o f budget hotels and guest
houses to market themselves to the world. IFC/MPDF i s also helping the garment sector to cope with increasing
global competition b y strengthening the training capacity o f the Lao Textile and Garment Industry Group.
Improving the climate for private enterprise. IFC/MPDF has been supporting the Government’s Private Sector
Development Strategy, as defined in the NGPES, b y addressing key legal and administrative constraints to SME
development. As a priority, the Facility i s currently implementing three closely related components. These are:
serving as the secretariat to the Lao Business Forum (LBF) which w i l l hold i t s first meeting in 2005; conducting
action-oriented research on key private sector issues identified b y the LBF’s working groups; and collaborating
with FIAS in providing the Government with technical assistance in drafting key business legislation.

- 43 85.
With the full support of the Government of Lao PDR, the Bank’s assistance program will make
use of the new flexible country financing parameters, but carefully and according to pre-specified application criteria. Individual projects may be financed up to 100 percent, including taxes and duties, based
on merit and justification. Bank financing o f 100 percent i s expected for social sectors and the rural sector, including the environment and biodiversity subsectors. Co-financing w i l l s t i l l be encouraged when
available. Regarding l i m i t s that would apply to the overall amount o f recurrent expenditures that the Bank
may finance, there w i l l be no country-level limit, but decision criteria w i l l be applied for each project and
line item with due regard to sustainability. The Bank may finance local costs as needed to achieve project
objectives more efficiently. The Bank w i l l also be able to finance taxes and duties, as the tax system i s
considered reasonable in Lao PDR.
86.
WBZ is working with the country team to mainstream the capacity development strategy that
focuses on the design, implementation and monitoring o f capacity development in PRSCs, investment
projects and non-lending activities. WBI i s currently providing knowledge support to public expenditure
management, and to new and ongoing projects in the transport and education sectors, with additional
support planned in trade, environment, and development o f local institutions.
D.

PORTFOLIO
MANAGEMENT

Nature and scope of the Lao PDR portfolio. As o f January 31, 2005, IDA credits totaling
87.
US$723 million equivalent have been approved for Lao PDR with US$586 million disbursed, o f which
US$37 million has been repaid. These credits have supported development projects in various sectors
such as rural development, agriculture, forestry, transport, energy, education, health, land reform,
financial management, capacity building, and policy reforms. The current portfolio includes nine active
credits amounting to US$153.6 million o f which US$122 million i s undisbursed. The fact that half o f the
portfolio has been replaced b y new projects in the last 12 months explains the small disbursed amount.
Excluding the Land Titling project which w i l l close next September, the average active l i f e o f the
remaining eight projects i s only 22 months. Currently there i s only one problem project. Implementation
progress o f the Sustainable Forestry for Rural Development Project was rated unsatisfactory in December
2004. The project i s expected to return to satisfactory status once the Government addresses some staffing
issues affecting project management. The sustainability rating of World Bank-financed operations in Lao
PDR has been satisfactory: a review o f the last 14 ICRs shows that 11 projects (80 percent o f the
portfolio) were rated likely or better in terms o f sustainability. Moreover, the performance o f the borrower
has been rated satisfactory or better on all but one project, showing a strong commitment from the
Government.

88.
The current portfolio is well aligned with the CAS with most projects simultaneously
supporting several of the objectives, especially rural development. The portfolio also includes 17
grantsz2(PHRD, JSDF, GEF, IDF) amounting to US$17 million in support o f increased empowerment o f
rural communities in uplands areas, efficient procurement systems, improved financial accountability in
SOEs and the private sector, and various capacity building and project preparation activities.

89.
Although implementation and disbursement have been satisfactory over the last four years,
improvements are still required. A series o f measures i s being undertaken to address issues at the country
and project levels relating to implementation readiness, capacity building, financial management,
auditing, implementation arrangements, and project planning, monitoring and evaluation. The CFAA and
CPAR identified a series o f actions to strengthen the capacity o f the Government to manage public
expenditures and procurement. Results are already evident in procurement, as evidenced b y the
endorsement of an effective procurement decree and accompanying rules and regulations, preparation of
22

Five grants totaling US$10.2 million are pending effectiveness as o f February 21,2005.

- 44 harmonized standard bidding documents, and establishment of a Public Procurement Monitoring Office.
The CAS w i l l support implementation o f other key recommendations.

90.
The World Bank will also give priority to improving the quality of the portfolio under
supervision. A t the project level, the World Bank and the Government w i l l incorporate lessons learned
from in-depth fiduciary reviews recently carried out on the World Bank-financed portfolio in several
other Asian countries. Detailed and stricter procedures w i l l be incorporated into project documents and
agreements: (i)
identification o f specific anti-corruption measures as part o f the project readiness criteria
filter; (ii)strengthening o f procurement and financial management mechanisms in project design and
implementation; (iii)improving disclosure mechanisms; (iv) greater involvement of beneficiaries in
project design and implementation; (v) strengthening of the World Bank’s own supervision mechanisms;
and (vi) systematic follow-up on cases of non-compliance, integrity issues and audit findings, along with
appropriate remedial measures. The World Bank also w i l l emphasize capacity development activities in
monitoring the portfolio. As appropriate, existing projects w i l l be restructured to match closely capacity
development activities with expected project development outcomes.
E.

SCENARIOS AND TRIGGERS

9 1.
The base-case IDA allocation, which is annually determined by the performance-based
allocation system, currently provides an indicative allocation of US$128 millionz3 over the four year
period of the CAS.24 The Performance-based Allocation (PBA) system that allocates IDA resources
among countries each year i s strongly linked to country performance as measured b y the CPIA ratings with strong weights attached to governance - as well as World Bank portfolio performance. This system
further underscores the importance o f maximizing results and impact, especially for a country like Lao
PDR where available IDA resources are limited and are currently lower than during the last CAS. Lao
PDR’s performance in some key CPIA categories has been lagging in recent years, but with the renewed
impetus for reforms and recent measures (particularly in areas such as public financial management, fiscal
transparency and accountability) i t i s possible that performance ratings could improve and thus generate
higher IDA allocations during the years covered b y this CAS. Given Lao PDR’s low income and high
debt burden, i t i s expected that a significant portion o f IDA resources w i l l be available as grants.
92.
A framework for assessing government performance and the adequacy of the policy
environment has been developed. I t focuses around key reforms in four areas: economic growth, public
resource management policy (including government obligations under NT2), poverty reduction, and
portfolio performance. The Government has begun reforms in each o f these areas and maintaining
momentum i s important in the base case. A number o f indicators, presented in Table 10, w i l l be used to
make a judgment about the overall level o f performance and adequacy o f the policy environment for base
and high case scenarios.

This includes a one-time allocation for the NT2 program in FY05.
IDA-14 rules for IDA allocations are likely to change from the IDA-13 rules; however these rules are not
finalized at this point.
23
24

-

45 -

Outcome Areas
Economic Growth
Macroeconomic
Stability

(by raising revenue/GDP ratios; by limiting wage
increases to sustainable levels;: by controlling
govemment borrowing; and limiting domestic
financing)
Reduce inflation to and sustain it in single

Accelerate increase in revenue
collections to over 14 % o f GDP

Regional Integration
and Private Sector
Development

Continue liberalizing AFTA trade and
reducing time to start a business

Implement recommendations of
the trade and investment climate
studies

Public Expenditure
ManagementIPolicy

Strengthen public expenditure management
(by implementing the 5-year Public Expenditure
Management Strengthening Program (PEMSP)
Enhance transparency (by publishing
expenditure plans, budget, budget execution
reports and financial statements regularly; by
applying revised chart of accounts & expanding
coverage)
Improve State Audit Office (SAO) Capacity,
(by preparing and publishing peer review report
on S A 0 by INTOSAI member; by implementing
i t s recommendations)

Initiate public administration
reform in Ministry of Finance

Center-Province
Fiscal Relations
State-owned
Enterprises
State Commercial
Banks (SCBs)
Natural Resource
Management

Continue SOE reforms (by restructuringlarge
SOEs; by appropriate tariff adjustments in
infrastructure SOEs).
Improve performance of SCBs (by
strengthening govemance and reducing directed
loans; by enhancing regulations and supervision).
Satisfactory implementation of NT2
Environment and social safeguards

EducatiodHealth

Make provinces accountable (by
ensuring that expenditures are in
line with budget; by eliminating n e b
arrears to private contractors; by
paying civil servants salaries on
time)

Poverty Reduction

Integrate NGPES into the next Five-Year Plan
and implement

Initiate public administration
reform in social sectors
Accelerate implementation of
NGPES

IP and DO ratings

Achieve satisfactory I P and DO for 70 percent
of projects

Achieve satisfactory IP and DO
for 80 percent of projects

I

93.
Low case and high case lending scenarios will respond to client performance and the pace of
reforms and implementation. A l o w case lending scenario, which would be characterized b y a weak
macroeconomic stance, slow pace or serious backtracking on the reform agenda and implementation o f
the poverty reduction strategy, or a poorly performing portfolio that significantly reduces Lao PDR’s
score on the PBA, w i l l provide about US$40-80 million over FY05-FY08 and fund directly-povertyrelated activities such as income generating and rural development projects, projects in the social sectors,
and capacity development. World Bank support for PRSCs i s not envisaged under the l o w case. If-there i s
substantive non-compliance in the NT2 project, including non-compliance with safeguard and revenue

- 46 management undertakings, the World Bank would consider even further curtailing lending levels,
including the option of not engaging in future financing and/or suspension of the entire portfolio, until i t
i s satisfied that agreements are being met and there i s adherence to commitments. If the pace o f reforms
and implementation greatly accelerate and significant additional key policy changes are undertaken, i t
would be expected that the PBA exercise could push Lao PDR into a high case lending scenario of about
30 percent more IDA allocation than the base case. These additional resources would be provided mainly
through modulated PRSC amounts in support o f policy and institutional reforms, such as in PSD,
regulatory reforms, financial sector liberalization, the SOE restructuring program, or through one or two
additional investment operations.

F.

MONITORINGCAS IMPLEMENTATION

94.
The implementation of the results-based CAS will be monitored and evaluated at frequent
intervals to enhance effectiveness, determine accountability, and provide feedback for modifcations
and corrections. The M&E w i l l be undertaken in a participatory manner in consultation with the
Government and other stakeholders. These w i l l include annual CAS M&E retreats with the World Bank‘s
Lao PDR Country Team and key stakeholder representatives including the Government, donors, NGOs,
and other members of civil society. Independent evaluators may be commissioned to prepare the
background material and issues for these retreats. The CAS Results Matrix (Attachment 1) w i l l serve as a
checklist o f the intermediate and higher level outcomes for which the country team i s accountable. The
details o f the M&E mechanisms w i l l be developed and agreed with the client and stakeholders. These
M&E exercises w i l l be critical for providing the flexibility required in a four-year CAS and w i l l feed into
the CAS Progress Report to be prepared and presented two years after the CAS i s discussed.
95.
Monitoring the elements of the N T 2 project will be particularly important during this CAS
period. As indicated in para. 74, a comprehensive M&E program i s being developed and w i l l provide
timely feedback to the Government, developers, International Financial Institutions and other interested
stakeholders to take corrective action in implementation of the different management programs, and also
to track outcomes. The M&E framework for the project includes: supervision o f physical implementation
o f the hydropower project b y professional engineering f i r m s under contract to the developers and the
Government; monitoring b y the D a m Safety Review Panel and the Panel o f Experts (both mandated by
the World Bank’s safeguard policies); systematic monitoring o f the technical and safeguards components
o f the project and its impacts by one or more professional firms on behalf o f the private and public sector
financial institutions; monitoring implementation o f NT2 revenue management arrangements, including
regular public expenditure reviews and public expenditure tracking surveys; an International Advisory
Group to advise the World Bank’s senior management on the implementation o f this high corporate risk
project; and supervision b y staff o f the World Bank and other International Financial Institutions
96.
A strong field presence will be essential for monitoring CAS implementation. A greater field
presence w i l l be needed to ensure results and to help build capacity for implementing more complex
infrastructure projects given the NT2 program o f activities. The Country Office w i l l need to maintain
excellent working relationships and open dialogue with all levels o f government. Donor coordination w i l l
also be a critical element o f field presence, as well as participation in Donor Working Groups. The World
Bank’s administrative budget w i l l be allocated to reflect the CAS priorities, including the need to fully
fund the maintenance of a quality portfolio, the stringent implementation o f NT2 and all related safeguard
measures and consultations, the multi-year AAA cycle, the design o f high quality operations at both the
entry and implementation stages, enhancement o f local capacity, and the ability to undertake effective
partnerships and collaborative efforts. In keeping with recent trends, i t i s expected that various Trust
Funds, usually executed by local counterparts, w i l l continue to provide additional grant resources (such as
GEF, IDF, PHRD) for selected operations, project preparation, research, and strategy formulation.

- 47 97.
The Bank will continue to expand its capacity for improved communications and outreach with
various stakeholders involved in Lao PDR’s development. The Bank w i l l build upon the considerable
experience gained in its involvement with the N T 2 project, where proactive engagement and communications with various stakeholders has been accorded a high priority, both locally and internationally. These
activities have focused on anticipating and mitigating risk, sharing information on project development
and the Bank’s assistance stance, and updating the international community on Lao PDR’s progress with
reforms and poverty reduction efforts. Moving forward, the Bank w i l l strengthen i t s capacity to carry out
continuous engagement with various stakeholders. The Bank w i l l work in coordination with donors in
creating a multidonor funded public information and development outreach center as a focal point for
housing and disseminating development information. This Public Information Center w i l l share information on development in general as well as sharing research. These efforts -- combined with greater emphasis on engaging stakeholders, civil society, and local communities in the development, design, and
implementation o f Bank-supported projects -- as well as increased involvement o f local academicians and
researchers in the Bank’s AAA work and better dissemination o f findings, should help to improve the impact o f Bank work, as well as familiarity with the Bank and i t s role in Lao PDR’s development.

V.

MANAGING RISKS

98.
The CAS presents an ambitious program supporting selected elements of the broad NGPES
agenda and its implementation and achievement of results are subject to multiple risks. The risks fall
under the following four categories: first, risks arising from performance by the Government on the
NGPES, which i s the framework around which the CAS i s designed, caused b y fluctuating political
commitment and weak implementation capacity; second, r i s k s arising specifically from lack o f
performance under the N T 2 project; third, risks relating to the effectiveness o f support extended to the
country b y i t s external development partners, including the World Bank; and fourth, risks arising from
external factors over which the Government has no control. The management o f these r i s k s w i l l determine
the pace and direction of future policy reforms under NGPES, as well as implementation performance on
the N T 2 project. The proposed CAS scenarios and IDA programs are designed to address these issues,
including cases o f slower or faster reforms and modulating levels o f IDA support.
99.
Country-level NGPES risks revolve around potential for weak political w i l l and commitment to
reforms, as well as weak capacity to implement desired reforms in areas such as revenue mobilization,
trade reform, SOE restructuring, etc. (see para. 38). There i s also the risk o f weaker engagement on
broader reform issues after N T 2 i s approved. However, with the NGPES consultative development
process and subsequent approval b y the National Assembly, the Government has generated broad national
stakeholder commitment to the NGPES program as a whole and to the push for regional collaboration and
integration in particular. In addition, donors have raised their levels o f collaboration and joint action with
the Government in the development, and now implementation, of the NGPES; and regular Round Table
and other meetings w i l l focus attention on the measures needed to sustain reform momentum. The World
Bank program w i l l also provide a strong basis for continued dialogue with the Government on different
options for reforms. Although some reversals in progress on reforms cannot be ruled out and the overall
pace of reforms w i l l vary from sector to sector, the internal momentum for reform and the coordinated
support o f the donor community should help sustain political commitment. Similarly, with regard to
weak government capacity, the UNDP, the World Bank, and other donors are working closely on
supporting the development of government capacity to turn its NGPES program into prioritized and
costed action plans that are implementable b y key ministries and many donors are working with the
Government to improve key systems that are the backbone to an efficient public administration. The
World Bank’s planned support for strengthening capacity throughout the CAS, in i t s AAA, and through
its investment support program, highlights concrete capacity development measures to strengthen

- 48 implementation at the institutional level. Progress in these respects w i l l all help alleviate the very real
capacity constraints that currently exist.

100. Risks arising from lack of performance under NT2. These risks relate in particular to use o f
natural resource revenues for non-poverty related activities and failure of the Government to abide b y i t s
commitments in implementing the critical safeguard arrangements for NT2. World Bank and other donor
assistance in support o f Lao PDR’s PEMSP and the N T 2 revenue management arrangements w i l l be the
primary instruments for managing the revenue management risk. N T 2 project arrangements include a set
o f legal agreements and carefully designed enforcement mechanism, while the planned series o f PRSCs
and accompanying Technical Support w i l l help maintain momentum on the broader program of Public
Financial Management reform, helping the Government to systematically address issues as they arise and
developing a system that w i l l be more effective and more transparent for all natural resource revenues.
Similarly with regard to safeguards, within the context of the N T 2 program, the World Bank w i l l provide
assistance for supervision and monitoring through the N T 2 Guarantee and the NTSEP; while at the
national level, the LEnS project w i l l complement NTSEP b y addressing capacity and policy issues,
including strengthened capacities in environmental assessment, monitoring and compliance, resettlement
planning and implementation, protected area management, river basin and watershed management, and
environmental education and awareness. Independent technical and environmental experts w i l l also
continue to be involved in monitoring implementation to help guard against safeguard violations. Finally,
the partnership agreement among the donors involved in NT2, that i s being shared with the broader donor
community, highlights the need for coordinated donor responses, including with respect to the
Government’s performance on NT2. IDA assistance also w i l l be influenced during the current CAS
period and beyond b y government performance on i t s legal obligations to the World Bank regarding the
N T 2 project.

101. Risks relating to uncoordinated donor support. The donor community in Lao PDR i s making
progress in strengthening its coordination but a potential lack o f commitment b y donors to align their
resources around common frameworks could pose a risk for implementation o f the NGPES and
achievement o f CAS objectives. This risk i s compounded b y the World Bank’s relatively l o w level o f
IDA allocations and administrative budget. These factors call for an approach that coordinates and thus
leverages the World Bank’s AAA work and small lending program through stronger partnerships with
other donors. Fortunately, strong donor coordination exists around the NGPES and w i l l continue to be
reinforced through the regularly scheduled Donor Working Groups and increased use o f harmonization
guidelines. The use of the UNDP supported Round Table Meetings as a platform to deliver messages to
all stakeholders and reaffirm commitments to the Government’s vision should also help to strengthen
coordination and collaboration.
102.
External risks. Changes in the trade regime, such as the end o f the MFA, or adverse economic
developments in Lao PDR’ s main trading partners could weaken export prospects. Mitigation measures
include strong movement forward on the Integrated Trade Framework where government commitment i s
high; analytical work on the Investment Climate Assessment leading to policy changes, improved
incentives and increased flexibility in the private sector to respond to shocks; continued support to
strengthened dialogue and partnership with neighboring countries to facilitate integration and
diversification; support for the private sector through IFC and MPDF; and continued PRSC support for
key policy changes.

- 49 VI.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

103. As Lao PDR continues to implement i t s NGPES program and accelerate the positive trend in
reducing poverty, the alignment o f the World Bank’s CAS to support t h i s effort w i l l be significantly
strengthened by more comprehensive capacity development, improved donor coordination and
harmonization, and expanded analytical and advisory activities. The proposed framework to evaluate the
achievement o f the CAS objectives and World Bank performance w i l l validate whether this new approach
to operating in Lao PDR w i l l enhance the development impact of IDA resources. Lao PDR w i l l continue
to need concessional assistance from its international partners and this CAS provides the foundation for
that support over the next four years.

80 -

b

'P

E

0

0

.

0

.

.

.

.

a

.

0

.

.

z

a-

3 e.3

*

*

*

0

B

33

L40

0

.

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Y

3

B

-

e

e

a

e

m e

e

- 58 Attachment 2
CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
1.
Capacity development i s the “process by which individuals, groups, organizations,
institutions and societies develop abilities to perform functions, solve problems, and set and
achieve objectives.”’ Capacity i s thus critical to achieving specific, measurable development
results. In countries where capacity i s weak, achieving specific measurable results requires
attention not only to appropriate skills, but to incentive systems, organizational processes, and
institutions. This implies a broad country-led approach to capacity development, going beyond
the transfer o f skills to an endogenous process o f strengthening institutional and management
arrangements and systems. The retention and effective use o f existing capacity are just as
important as building capacity. Hence addressing the personnel incentive regime - ensuring
adequate base pay and performance rewards - i s also important for building effective capacity. A
growing body of evidence suggests that successful donor support for capacity development must
respond f i r s t and foremost to demand from key stakeholders and be nurtured through appropriate
incentives.
2.

The Government realizes that overcoming i t s capacity challenge i s important to achieving
i t s development goals. Although the NGPES does not articulate a comprehensive, integrated

strategy to address capacity bottlenecks, capacity needs are featured throughout the strategy.
Specific areas where the NGPES notes the need for a greater emphasis o n capacity include:
strengthening public services, especially at the district level; undertalung administrative reforms
to improve the functioning o f the government and c i v i l service; and building capacity in financial
management, decentralization, and development planning. The NGPES notes the importance o f
the National Organization for the Study o f Policy and Administration (NOSPA), the primary civil
service training institution, in supporting these reforms. The CPI, with responsibility for
implementation o f the NGPES, will need to ensure overall coordination o f capacity development
activities within the Government. Capacity development at the sectoral level will be managed by
line ministries. NOSPA has responsibility for capacity development o f the civil service and at the
sub-national level and the Ministry o f Finance’s Institute will handle capacity development in the
area o f public financial management.

3.
The challenges to overcoming capacity constraints, however, should not be under
estimated and emerging opportunities should be supported. Progress will be slow and incremental
and the achievement o f a broad capacity enhancement fi-amework may not be fully realized
during the timeframe o f this CAS. Shortages o f management and technical skills in finance,
accounting and procurement are particularly acute. Organizational structures and basic
management systems (such as the budget process and monitoring and evaluation functions) are
not aligned with government development priorities. Centralized decision-malung often
discourages local initiatives. L o w levels o f pay, delays in payment o f salaries (especially in rural
areas), and lack o f performance-based promotions weaken the motivation for high levels o f public
sector performance. The decision-making process i s n o t well-understood and the distinctions
between legislative, executive, and judicial functions are blurred. Decision makers are often
isolated from the civil service and conversely civil servants are often poorly informed about
government policy, legislation and even administrative procedures. The Government continues to
control the activities o f the private sector through cumbersome investment procedures and annual

’ UNDP, Capacity Development, 1997.

- 59 tax licenses. The Government indicates a strong preference for local expertise to provide
technical assistance, but few consultants with the requisite s h l l s exist.

4.
Nevertheless, opportunities are emerging. Accountability and transparency are increasing
in some areas with elections n o w held for the National Assembly and village leaders (albeit
usually from party lists only). National Assembly debates are n o w televised, budgets are
published, and community development projects allow broader involvement in decision-makmg
at the field level to design, implement, and monitor outcomes o f local investments. Efforts are
also being made to clarify the role o f the legislature and judiciary, and responsibility for the
administration o f the civil service has been restored to the Prime Minister’s office, evidence o f
the importance that the Government gives to improving civil service performance. Recognition o f
the challenges posed by A S E A N and WTO accession has also spurred openness to learning from
the experience o f China, Malaysia, Vietnam, and Thailand and has encouraged growing ties with
neighboring countries and an examination o f their reform processes. Training o f civil servants i s
n o w delivered by a range o f institutions, and also by making greater use o f the university and
training events sponsored by external partners. Modern public sector and economic management
concepts have entered the curriculum o f degree courses, and NOSPA i s exploring institutional
partnerships with institutions in Thailand as well as with WBI.
5.
T w o studies o f the political economy o f reform undertaken in parallel to C A S preparation
provide important insights into designing the Bank’s assistance strategy. The first study assessed
the social and political factors that influenced the reform agenda, focusing o n decentralization,
governance, and the private sector.* The second was an informal comparative analysis o f reform
in China and Vietnam and the implications i t may have for the trajectory for the reform program
in Lao PDR. These reports highlighted that reform will be made according to Lao timetables,
which may be slower than donors would like (and likely slower until the 8’ Party Congress meets
in 2006); that many government and party officials remain suspicious o f western ways; that
personal relationships are critical and broadening our scope o f contacts within government, both
formally and informally, will be important; that presenting strong rational options based on good
research data in face-to-face encounters in relaxed and informal settings i s more effective than
written communication; that comparators from A S E A N countries and other neighbors i s
effective; that even ifradical reform i s unlikely, incremental improvements are possible and are
very important for improving governance and building capacity; and that working at the level o f
local government (following the example o f China) and supporting the building o f i t s capacity i s
also important.

LESSONS
LEARNED
FROM BANKPROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
6.
A number o f reviews have been undertaken to assess lessons learned fi-om Banksupported capacity building in Lao PDR. These included a Capacity Development Portfolio
Retrospective that analyzed the capacity focus and impact o f technical assistance (TA) and
training in 10 recent Bank projects in Lao PDR; a Capacity Development Concept Note
articulating an approach to mainstreaming capacity development in the new CAS; a capacity
analysis o f the local administrative training institute, NOSPA, and a WBI-designed CE
framework and methodology to address capacity issues at the institutional, organizational, and

Stuart-Fox, Martin, “Politics and Reform in the L a o People’s Democratic Republic”, W o r k i n g Paper No.
1, Political Economy o f Development series, Program o n Civil Society and Governance, The College o f
W i l l i a m and Mary, M a y 2004.

- 60 individual levelse3Together this work highlights the need for a more integrated approach to
capacity development in the CAS by combining long-term efforts to address structural
weaknesses with opportunistic interventions aimed at short-term results.

7.

Although capacity building was considered a priority in the last CAS, n o explicit capacity
framework or strategy was articulated. As a result, capacity development efforts have been
fragmented. The Bank’s work has tended to focus on addressing i t s own fiduciary and reporting
requirements rather than o n the long-term needs o f the client. Inadequate attention has been given
to broader developmental goals or effectiveness.

8.
W B I ’ s review o f the Bank’s project portfolio in Lao PDR indicates that most Bank
interventions have included capacity development activities. However, the Bank’s capacity
development interventions have rarely been supported by a systematic assessment o f capacity
constraints and requirements and have generally lacked clearly defined capacity development
objectives and indicators. Consequently, i t has proved difficult to monitor and evaluate the
impact o f Bank interventions on capacity building.
9.
There have been some notable exceptions. One example o f effective capacity
development i s the Road Maintenance Program (RMP), an eight-year Adaptable Program Loan
(APL), approved in 2001 after considerable dialogue and after agreement on clear roles for
donors and other stakeholders. The project marked a major shift in focus from ad hoc donordriven investment to one o f harmonized preservation and sustainable management o f road assets.
Previously, donor-supported Project Implementation Units (PIUs), staffed by expatriates or
nationals, paid significantly higher salaries, increased transaction costs and seriously
compromised the development o f existing institutions and the effectiveness o f development
programs. Narrowly focusing capacity building on training and technical assistance failed to
address fundamental issues o f institutional incentives and organizational accountabilities. Roads
were being built, but not well maintained. As part o f the RMP, all implementation functions for
donor-financed projects in the road sector were internalized within the Ministry’s existing
structures and all ad hoc PIUs were dismantled. Absent PIUs, projects continued to be well
implemented by the Ministry and harmonized systems in financial management, procurement,
reporting and monitoring further increased efficiency. Building o n this experience, the second
phase o f the RMP will support a comprehensive human resources strategy. The Ministry will
track progress through the systematic monitoring o f pre-agreed indicators.

T h i s note builds on the considerable work that the Bank has done over the past year-and-a-half to review capacity
building activities, identify the key lessons leamed, and apply them to develop a more systematic and integrated
approach to capacity development. Contributing reviews and discussion pieces include: CE Portfolio Retrosuective;
Cauacity Development Conceut Note for Lao PDR CAS b y WBI and the C T that was complemented b y a Studv of the
Political Economv, which cautioned against an overly ambitious time line for effecting institutional change. E/
Results Framework powerpoint that lays out the 3-level (institutional, organizational and individual) framework and the
concem with linking improved skills and processes as intermediate outcomes leading to higher order operational or
development outcomes. Validating the Auuroach: Cauacitv Develoument Pilot in the Transuort Sector: WBI
participated in both pre-appraisal and appraisal missions for F W P 2 helping to design a process to prioritize, baseline
and monitor critical capacity issues constraining the decentralization o f the maintenance fund management and
procurement functions supporting rural road maintenance. Institutional Analvsis of the National Organization for the
Studv of Policv and Administration (NOSPA), which i s the main training institute (strongly tied to the Party) for the
civil service.

- 61 10.

Additional key lessons from experience in Lao P D R include:
Capacity building components within projects have been most effective when
applied within an integrated program-based approach linked into national and sector
strategies that prioritize specific capacity results. Skills building efforts combined
with policy reforms and donor alignment with country-led strategies have also had
stronger results.

At all levels (national and sector strategies, as well as in projects and analytical
work), capacity development should be linked to specific, measurable results and
broader development objectives. Ensuring the existence o f baseline information o n
capacity levels, defining appropriate indicators, monitoring interventions based on
outcomes, and realistic timetables are all important.
Approaches should be both opportunistic-aimed at achieving short-term resultsand strategic-gradually
addressing structural weaknesses that can only be
overcome over the long-term.
Capacity development requires a sound understanding o f incentive and governance
structures. Clearly understanding organizational processes at different levels (central,
provincial, and district) i s also required for developing strong institutional and
organizational capacity.
Capacity development activities should be matched with broader development
outcomes. Effective upstream communication with stakeholders, identification o f
champions, and deeper understanding o f incentive structures and change processes
are critical in project design and implementation.
Because o f the oral tradition in Lao PDR, written communication, and even lecturestyle training i s less effective than “learning-by-doing” where new concepts, policies
and processes are explained and then applied in everyday activities.

CAPACITYDEVELOPMENT
IN LAO
PDR: APPROACH
11.
These challenges and opportunities, as well as lessons learned from previous experience,
have implications for the approach the Bank takes to support the Government’s capacity
development strategy. Because capacity development encompasses the behaviors and
performance o f institutions, organizations and individuals, i t requires a better understanding o f
the governance structures and weaknesses that determine a country’s development potential. It
also requires a better understanding o f institutional and organizational incentives and processes,
so that weaknesses can be addressed. Mainstreaming capacity development also means that
external interventions need to be closely aligned with sector strategies, supporting the
development o f these strategies so that they are realistic and operational.
12.
Progress against both development and capacity enhancement objectives will have to be
monitored. Capacity development objectives should be mainstreamed in the design and
implementation o f individual operations (projects and analytical work) within a results-based
framework, This begins with a diagnosis o f capacity constraints, defining desired results,
articulating step-by-step strateges and defining ways o f measuring and monitoring progress.
Partnerships with local institutions are critical for designing and monitoring appropriate capacity

- 62 development initiatives, and to delivering key inputs such as training. Because the challenge i s
much larger than the resources available for addressing it, closer coordination will be needed
among development partners. Donor collaboration through sector programs will also be important
to ensure consistency and efficiency.

In light o f the above elements, the following will be important to incorporate into the
13.
Bank’s approach:
0

0

0

0

Explicitly and systematically assess capacity constraints as national (NGPES and SEDP)
and sectoral strategies are further developed. As the government moves towards
developing action plans for the implementation o f the NGPES, as w e l l as incorporating
the NGPES into the next SEDP, capacity constraints should be explicitly analyzed and
actions prioritized. In developing programs to address these gaps, clear objectives should
be set, measurable indicators defined, and monitoring systems put in place. This approach
applies equally to analytical work and should guide donor coordination efforts.
Ensure that capacity development strategies and interventions are informed by an
understanding of political economy and institutional incentives. In each area o f proposed
reform and at both central and local levels, a better understanding o f the decision-malung
process will improve the effectiveness o f the design and implementation o f our support to
government. At the level o f institutions that we work with, the Bank should seek to
understand h o w governance structures impact policies, programs, and activities. This will
better ensure that our policy advice i s more responsive to the needs o f policy makers and
i s grounded in a better appreciation o f current institutional and organizational realities.
Strengthen local training institutions to incorporate new material and expertise into their
curricula. Further support should include the universities, ministry-specific training
institutions such as the Ministry o f Finance Training Schools, the Customs Training
Facility, the National Audit Office Training Schools, and the 29 training institutions o f
the Ministry o f Education (of which t w o have capacity for accounting and finance
training), as well as NOSPA. The Second Education Development Project, for example,
i s supporting the MOE’s capacity building strategy to build up in-country capacity for the
delivery o f training in education administration and management through the
establishment o f a Department for Education Administration and Management within the
Faculty o f Education at the National University o f Lao (a US$1 million project
component). Training o f trainers i s another area where donors have had some impact and
more could be done.
Ensure capacity development is mainstreamed into the Bank’s country program.
Capacity development should be embedded in the routines o f program and project
development, implementation and monitoring o f the Bank’s portfolio, as well as in the
design, implementation, and follow-up o f analytical work. Client feedback should be
encouraged. All projects, programs, and analytical work - including on-going projects should develop a capacity development strategy, including monitorable performance
indicators, within the first year o f C A S implementation. Activities should be aligned
within the broader sectoral strategies and action plans and should systematically baseline,
build, and monitor key capacities. Activities should place greater emphasis o n learning by
doing, ensuring that training i s sequenced with policy and institutional reforms that will
improve potential for new skills to be used and institutionalized. Bank teams and their
government counterparts will require guidance on h o w t o apply the broad capacity

- 63 development fi-amework operationally, and simple tools and guidelines will be developed
to help them to: (i)diagnose capacity constraints; (ii)develop a coherent capacity
development strategy; and (iii)
design monitoring mechanisms.

CAPACITYDEVELOPMENT
IN LAO
PDR: Focus
14.
Given scarce resources, Bank support will focus on achieving N G P E S K A S results in
areas where: (i)the Bank has a demonstrated track record, comparative advantage, or global
knowledge and experience to build confidence and create demand for change, (ii)there i s
sufficient government commitment to building capacity to achieve priority results, (iii)an
institutional entry point has been identified where overcoming capacity constraints will
significantly affect development outcomes, and (iv) other stakeholders, including donors, have a
shared commitment to common results and coordination o f efforts and resources.

15.
In supporting the achievement o f NGPES results, during this CAS period the Bank will
focus i t s capacity building efforts in three main areas: (i)
building relationships with policy
makers and helping to strengthen organizational processes and incentive systems; (ii)
helping to
strengthen national, sectoral, and training institutions by better integrating capacity development
into all W o r l d Bank activities; and (iii)
building partnerships, consulting, and helping to enhance
the capacity o f the private sector, civil society and mass based organizations, and communities.
While this Appendix does not attempt to be comprehensive, it outlines below some o f key areas
of planned Bank involvement.
1. Build relationships and strengthen organizational processes and incentive systems.
16.
Continuing to strengthen relationships at different levels o f government and with
different institutions will be important during the CAS period for stronger and better informed
policy dialogue. During the f i r s t few years o f C A S implementation, there will be a strong focus
on public financial management as a core backbone to stronger public administration as well as
good governance. The Bank program will also support analytical work o n the trade and
investment environment to strengthen government understanding o f various policy options for
strengthening policies to enhance regional and global integration. Other parts o f the work
program will focus o n decentralization in a pilot province, Khammouane, through both analytical
work and lending. Other aspects o f public sector reform, such as c i v i l service pay, will be
addressed through PRSCs. Outlined here, as an example of some o f this work, i s our approach to
supporting the development o f capacity o f government in public financial management.
17.
Strengthen core publicfinancial management capacities. In April 2003, the Government
developed a governance reform program based o n actions in four priority areas: (i)
public service
reform; (ii)
people’s participation; (iii)
the rule o f law; and (iv) sound financial management. The
UNDP’s Governance and Public Administration Reform Program (GPAR) i s supporting this
improvement in governance by targeting c i v i l service reforms and redefining central-local
relationships (decentralization). Efforts are underway o n a pilot basis to improve the management
o f public administration through increased professionalism and merit-based recruitment. W o r k o n
strengthening participation and decentralization i s being supported by a group o f donors to
encourage local empowerment and clarify roles o f central and local authorities. Japan and
Norway are helping to strengthen judicial reform activities and the W o r l d Bank, ADB and UNDP
are focusing support o n public financial management to improve fiscal planning, budget
preparation, revenue and expenditure management and financial legislation and regulations.
Building on a joint W o r l d Bank, IMF, ADB Public Expenditure Review, the recently completed

- 64 Financial Management Adjustment Credit, and a strong dialogue on the management o f natural
resource revenues catalyzed by N a m Theun 2 preparation, the Bank has worked with the
government to develop a Public Expenditure Management Strengthening Program (PEMSP) with
a significant capacity development component.

18.
The m a i n objective o f the PEMSP i s to increase Ministry o f Finance capacity to more
effectively and transparently utilize public financial resources in line with NGPES/MDG results.
I t will ensure that key staff have the technical skills needed to fulfill their assigned expenditure
management functions through targeted training and gradually develop a cadre o f accredited
financial management personnel.
0

0

Articulation and implementation of a strategic framework for public expenditure reforms
with an explicit emphasis on capacity. In close coordination with other donors (especially
ADB and IMF), the Bank worked with the Government to develop a comprehensive
public expenditure management strengthening program that integrates activities (and
donor support) around a common framework. Capacity development i s a key component
o f the PEMS, built around two government objectives: (1) to raise national public sector
skills for improved budget preparation and execution; and (2) to improve quality and
transparency o f public financial management including enabling it to meet intemational
accounting and auditing standards. This will be supported by the N T 2 Loan Guarantee,
Financial Management Capacity Building Credit (FMCBC), proposed PRSCs, and PHRD
grants.
Support for specijk institutional, organization, and individual capacity building
measures highlighted in the PEMSP. Discussions are underway to determine specific
areas and modalities for W o r l d Bank support for PEMSP capacity. At the organizational
level (both nationally and at the provincial and district administration levels) the program
will develop appropriate systems for expenditure planning and budgeting to allocate
public resources more effectively according to the Government’s development and
poverty reduction policy objectives and will improve procedures and s k i l l s for better
budget execution, accounting, and financial reporting. These activities will include an
initial needs assessment and capacity building strategy (FY04-05), revised organizational
roles and responsibilities; upgrading and development o f financial training institutions;
and training o f critical staff. This will be supported by the FMCBC, PRSCs, and activities
supported jointly with UNDP.

2. Strengthen national and sectoral institutions, as well as training institutions

19.
The Bank program will strengthen local capacity in every area o f Bank involvement,
supporting country capacity development goals through all C A S instruments - policy and project
loans, sector strategies, and analytical and advisory work. B o x 1 outlines h o w capacity
development will be integrated with Bank product cycles to support the development o f country
capacities, ensuring that capacity constraints and political economy issues will be considered at
the concept stages, firmed up during decision point stages, and evaluated during implementation.
The program will support cross-sectoral government capacities to manage the process o f
deepening and implementing the NGPES, including workshops for the National Assembly o n
NGPES implementation, costing, and budgetary oversight. I t will also strengthen capacities o f
sectoral institutions at the national, provincial, and district levels to develop and effectively
implement sound sector strateges and programs. It will strengthen capacities o f local training
institutions to support capacity development activities. A few other examples o f h o w Bank
instruments will strengthen national and sectoral institutions are presented.

- 65 -

CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
AND BANKPRODUCT CYCLES
Capacity development objectives, strategies and performance indicators will be integrated into each stage o f
the product cycle. I t will be made explicit in the concept note for projects and policy and analytical work. At
this stage task teams can identify financing requirements to address capacity issues in project preparation,
such as diagnostic studies, and the
national and regional partners that can
support development o f the capacity
development strategy.
During
preparation capacity constraints will
be taken into account and addressed
when
formulating
objectives,
performance indicators and targets.
This will entail the formulation o f
Project / Policy
Monitoring
& Anal- - -’
specific
capacity
development
(
Preparation
\
strategies, identification o f specific
capacity development inputs and
results, Particular attention will be
given to h o w analytical and policy
w o r k can be integrated into the
Government’s policy making process,
the identification o f target audiences
and
appropriate
communication
strategies.
Key
performance
indicators should consist o f the extent
t o which policy recommendations are
adopted, implemented and their impact assessed. At decision meetingdappraisalthe adequacy o f the project
o r AAA capacity development framework will be assessed. National institutions should take the lead in
project implementation,with particular emphasis o n learning by doing. Where specific inputs are provided consulting and training services - there should be a strong preference for partnerships with local institutions.
F o r policy and analytical work, the implementation stage extends beyond the analytical work t o cover i t s
adoption and application as policy. This i s likely to increase the cost and timeframe o f policy and analytical
work. Routine monitoring and follow-up should regularly review progress t o help project teams and clients
assess whether capacity development strategies are having the desired results and make appropriate
adjustments. Retrofittingexisting projects may also be needed. Evaluation at the project and program level
should focus o n the impact o f interventions o n institutional capacity and lessons-learned: these assessments
are likely to have a greater impact when national institutions are directly involved.

. .

20
Strengthen Committee on Planning and Investment (CPI) capacity to implement the
NGPES. The CPI has overall responsibility to support and manage implementation o f the
NGPES. CPI will need to work in collaboration with the technical ministries and organizations
that actually implement the Government’s programs -- prioritizing, costing, and monitoring the
NGPES. Developing monitoring systems i s a critical element o f successful implementation o f the
NGPES, as they are an important way to foster a culture o f learning and innovation in the public
sector, providing feedback o n strengths and weaknesses, successes and failures. Jointly with
other donors (the UN, ADB, WHO, SIDA, etc.), the Bank will assist CPI and other targeted
institutions (Ministries o f Health, Education, Agriculture, and Infrastructure in the initial round)
to set priorities and monitor progress as follows:
0

Workshops. A series o f joint Bank/UNDP-supported workshops and technical assistance
are helping C P I and line ministries (with NOSPA as an observer) t o prioritize actions
under the NGPES in light o f budget constraints. This includes articulating and
sequencing action plans in key sectors; reconciling needed expenditures with financing

- 66 constraints; and preparing sector programs and supporting matrices. The action plans will
identify key capacity constraints, select specific capacity interventions and develop
indicators to monitor progress. Instruments would include UNDP-Bank j oint support for
NGPES implementation, NGPES updates, donor theme group, and the UNDP monitoring
project.
Studies. In collaboration with donors, C P I will undertake a study to assess capacity gaps
and take inventory o f existing capacity initiatives and the resources assigned to them.
This has been suggested to the Government (in the JSAN, among others) and dialogue
needs to continue among donors and with the Government to determine the best
modalities for helping the Government to undertake such a complex task.
Data Collection and Analysis. Assist the National Statistical Center to build a poverty
monitoring and evaluation system and to link it with N G P E S M D G monitoring. This will
be supported by the Poverty Assessment, Lao PDR participation in regional WBI
initiatives, sectoral interventions, and activities supported by S I D A and other donors.
2 1,
Strengthen government capacity to apply environmental and social safeguards,
building on the NT2 project experience as well as extending to other regions. During the CAS
period the Bank will provide intensive support to the Government to build i t s capacity to apply
environmental and social safeguards both in support to the N T 2 program, as w e l l as more broadly
in other parts o f the country. This will be supported by the following instruments: NTSEP, LEnS,
GEF, and the ongoing forestry project. The environmental and social capacity development
objectives around N T 2 include:
Institutionalize the Watershed Management and Protection Authority. This agency will
improve management o f the Nakai N a m Theun Protected Area. The initial focus will be
o n improving capacity for: biodiversity assessment, patrolling and monitoring wildlife
poaching and logging, and community participation and livelihoods development.
Activities will include developing operational processes and rules for the Authority and
i t s engagement with stakeholders, staff training and study tours, partnership with NGOs
and other national parks, village facilitation teams, education and awareness programs.
Build the capacity of the Khammouane Province to undertake responsible, accountable
and effective resettlement. A decentralized government unit will coordinate resettlement
efforts in the province and the program will be implemented through a public-private
partnership that will build capacity o n both sides. NGO capacity will be developed to
support village-level planning and delivery o f livelihood programs and services and
village facilitation teams will be trained t o facilitate detailed village-level planning with
districts. Visits will also be made to other dam projects to learn good practices.
Improve the capacity of the Science, Technology and Environment Agency (STEA) to
monitor environmental compliance with NT2. Monitoring protocols and education and
awareness programs will be developed for STEA staff. S T E A staff will also be trained
both formally, as well as on the j o b through resident experts, to monitor compliance with
the Concession Agreement and to ensure adequate water quality.
Encourage the design of sustainable environmental and social policies and build
institutional capacity to implement those policies in Lao PDR beyond the NT2 project
urea. The Lao Environment and Social Project (LEnS) will support: (i)strengthened
capacities o f government institutions, including S T E A and MAF, at the central and

- 67 provincial levels, in environmental assessment, resettlement planning, monitoring and
enforcement, protected area management and raising environmental awareness; (ii)
establishment and operation o f a pilot financing vehicle for protected area management in
Central Lao, to be scaled-up in the long term as a permanent entity that will be eligible to
use N T 2 revenues for environmental protection activities in the country.

Strengthen key sectoral and provincial capacities where the Bank has a comparative
22.
advantage. Bank project and analytical work at the sectoral level - education, health, roads,
electricity, forestry, etc. - will support capacity development. Efforts include those in the
Ministry o f Education; Ministry o f Communications, Transport, Post, and Construction
(MCTPC); and Ministry o f Agriculture. Examples o f activities in the Ministry o f Education and
M T C P C are described below.
Strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Education to target resources to reach
vulnerable groups and to track education outcomes. Support will be provided to build
Ministry o f Education capabilities to: (1) target education resources to the most
vulnerable groups and better monitor expenditures; and (2) monitor education outcomes
and use monitoring information to inform policy decisions. With a particular focus o n the
47 poorest districts as identified in the NGPES, the activities would include: establishing
a monitoring and evaluation system to strengthen organizational processes and assess
education outcomes; supporting the development and implementation o f a public
expenditure trackmg survey (PETS) that will enable the Ministry o f Education to better
track allocations and expenditures (and would also link with the cross-cutting work o f the
Ministry o f Finance and with CPI in implementing the NGPES); baselining existing
functions and staff capabilities; and implementing training on program budgeting,
costing, and priority setting. These activities would be supported by any needed retrofitting o f the monitoring framework o f the Second Education Project (EDP2) t o include
capacity indicators related to project outcomes; and the PETS study to assess education
expenditures and identify key actions to improve transparency, accountability, and
effectiveness. A project coordination division focusing specifically o n M&E has been
established under the Ministry o f Education. Given the strong focus o n M&E for capacity
building by the MoE, consultants have been hired to work alongside the unit and provide
TA to help guide the unit’s staff in training other agencies within the M o E on designing a
monitoring framework in all aspects o f their work. An Education Sector Study i s also
planned.
Continue to improve the capacity of the MCTPC to manage the road network. Building
on successful pilot projects in the first Road Maintenance project (RMPl), the R M P 2 will
support increasing capacity for road management and financing through increased central
and provincial capacity for planning, budgeting, implementing maintenance work
programs; increased capacity for road transport management and safety; and building
organizational capacity o f M C T P C and provincial departments o f M C T P C to upgrade
key business functions, including safeguards, for effective performance under a
decentralized structure; promote results-oriented human resources development,
information technology and communications; strengthen transport business sector; and
improve environmental and social safeguards capacity. The RMP2 will also help to
decentralize road maintenance functions to the provincial level and build managerial
s h l l s to effectively manage and distribute the road maintenance funds to local
communities; and build the systems and capacity necessary for improved procurement
leading to the issuing o f small contracts for w o r k undertaken at the provincial level.
Based on decentralization o f road maintenance in t w o pilot provinces under RMP1, in

- 68 RMP2 a comprehensive HR strategy was developed for the Ministry t o standardize skills
and processes required for decentralization in all provinces. The process o f base-lining

capacity, tailoring capacity development interventions and agreeing on monitoring
indicators was undertaken during appraisal o f W 2 . A PHRD grant i s currently
supporting a consultancy study, based on detailed capacity building TORSin the R M P 2
PAD, to determine baseline capacities and monitor progress at both national and subnational levels.
23.
Strengthen capacity of local partner institutions to support capacity development
activities. Local institutions will play a critical role in helping to scale up the implementation o f
capacity development initiatives in Lao PDR. NOSPA i s the Government’s primary training
school for civil servants and i s identified in the NGPES as the focal point for supporting capacity
development activities. In partnership with other donors (including GTZ and UNDP), WBI and
the country team are working with NOSPA to strengthen NOSPA’s capacity to support NGPES
implementation. Tools include revised curriculum design and learning methodologies; research
and policy analysis; institutional twinning and other partnership arrangements between senior Lao
PDR government officials, their institutions and counterparts in neighboring countries (especially
China and the Ho-Chi Minh Academy in Vietnam). Partnerships with institutions from Korea and
Australia are also foreseen as a starting point for their international networks. WBI thematic
programs are poised to partner with NOSPA in the design and delivery o f skill and policy based
courses, to be the basis for enhancing the autonomy o f NOSPA in design, delivery as well as
related research in the second and third years. Instruments include: WBI thematic programs in
Trade, Investment Climate and PRSP; WBI PHRD funding for preliminary assessment and
design o f full program proposal for institutional strengthening to prepare it for NGPES
implementation; P H R D and IDF grants, partnership programs with GTZ, Melbourne Institute o f
Technology, UNDP, and the Korean Institute for Development Finance.

3. Build partnerships and capacity of the private sector and civil society
24.
During implementation o f the CAS, the Bank will build on the consultative process o f
both the NGPES and the development o f the CAS, by continuing a strong level o f dialogue and
participation with the private sector and broadly with civil society. I t will do this by
strengthening partnerships with the private sector, consulting with c i v i l society and mass-based
organizations, and by working with communities. Several activities are underway to work with
both the Government and the private sector to strengthen regional integration and private sector
development. The Poverty Reduction Fund Project i s also identified below as an example o f
capacity development at the community level.
25.
Strengthening partnership and capacity in the private sector. One example o f the way
the Bank will support partnerships and capacity in the private sector i s i t s support to the
development o f a pro-poor, pro-growth trade strategy. A Diagnostics Trade Integration Study
(DTIS) will serve as a road map for technical assistance and project support that enables Lao
PDR to improve i t s trade performance. Through a collaborative approach with a range o f
stakeholders, the study will build capacity, especially o f Ministry o f Commerce staff, to enable
them to access and analyze international trade data, better understand implications o f
commitments in trade, and identify key constraints to Lao PDR’s export competitiveness. The
study will better inform negotiations with the WTO and raise broader awareness among
policymakers and other stakeholders o n trade policies and pro-poor growth. This complements
the IFC/MPDF support t o the Lao Business Forum, which facilitates capacity development in the
private sector and provides an ongoing mechanism for improving coordination o f trade and
private sector initiatives. T o increase access to finance, IFC/MPDF has been workmg with the

- 69 Lao P D R banks and private SMEs on skills for credit assessments and loan performance.
Managerial training for SMEs i s being provided by the Facility as i s training for business
associations such as the Hotel and Restaurant Associations and Lao Textile and Garment Industry
Group, Collaborative work through the Donor Working Groups and through PRSCs will also
align donor assistance for south-south dialogue and other networks. A W o r l d Bank-ADB
Investment Climate Assessment undertaken in a collaborative manner will assess key constraints
and support development o f a private sector development action plan to coordinate key policy and
institutional reforms.

Support capacity development of civil society. The Bank will support community
26.
empowerment and civil society capacity development through a number o f i t s projects, grants,
and AAA. The ongoing Poverty Reduction Fund Project, as one example, applies a strong
participatory process at the village level to build community capacities to identify needs, develop
solutions, and participate in implementation and monitoring o f sub-projects. A primary objective
i s to build capacity and empower villages to manage their own public investment planning and
sub-project implementation in a transparent manner as well as to strengthen local institutions to
undertake participatory decision-making and conflict resolution processes at the village, interkhet, and district levels. Capacity building interventions include the establishment o f provincial
technical support teams to provide technical advice to project teams and training to District
Facilitators t o work directly with communities participating in the project (overseeing project
implementation and coordinating with district officials).

- 70 Guidelines:
Upstream Integration of Capacity Development in Lao PDR CAS Instruments
The overall goal o f the CAS program i s to support the development o f Lao capacity to
achieve i t s development objectives as articulated in the NGPES. A framework to integrate
capacity considerations into lending and non-lending CAS instruments has been developed. The
framework integrates capacity concems at the strategic level through NGPES implementation
workshops, policy dialogue and the PRSC. Annual C A S reviews, multi-donor roundtables and
other annual fora provide opportunities to reconfirm priorities and adjust programs as needed
based on progress indicators. Within the Bank CAS program, project loans, sector strategies and
AAA integrate consideration o f capacity constraints, outline capacity development actions and
monitor progress in improving capacity against agreed indicators.

NGPES Workshops.
A series o f joint World Bank, WBI, UNDP workshops hosted by C P I are aimed at
supporting NGPES implementation in four key sectors: education, health, infrastructure and
agriculture. These workshops constitute an opportunity to strengthen cross-cutting planning and
management s h l l s at the sectoral level. The workshops will cover program prioritization, costing
and budgeting and one module will be dedicated to identifying and monitoring critical capacity
gaps. This will enable the Government to improve coordination o f donor assistance for capacity
development.

The PRSC supports improvement o f public administration functions to better achieve the
NGPES targets. The program calls for a combination o f studies, advisory services, training and
organizational reforms, supported by the Bank and other donors, which will allow the support the
achievement o f PRSC objectives. The matrix below (Table A) i s an example o f the application o f
the capacity development framework to one result area in the PRSC (transport). The capacity
matrix was developed to articulate specific capacity constraints, outline possible interventions,
and define outcomes and monitoring indicators to assess whether capacity has improved.

Annual Fora
CAS Reviews: These should be an occasion for the Bank team to get a cross-cutting
view o f progress in the implementation o f project and ESW-specific capacity
development work as it relates to broad C A S goals.
Round Table Meetings: The Bank could propose to Round Table members that an
assessment o f capacity development efforts be captured in an annual review o f the
Government’s NGPES implementation.
Learning Activities: Leaming events such as NGPES, PEM and trade workshops can be
used as opportunities to introduce the notion o f capacity constraints associated with
implementing the specific elements and targets o f NGPES.
Ownership: The underlying critical success factor for implementing this approach to
capacity development i s to ensure ownership by the client. Periodic stakeholder
workshops or meetings designed to secure and reinforce client demand will be valuable.

- 71 Tat e A. SamDle P R S C CaDac v DeveloDment Framework (Tra

Capacity
Constraint

(Norms. incentives, rules)
Lack o f clarity o f roles and
weak accountability o f
provinces for managing Road
Maintenance Fund
Continued dependence on
donors to finance maintenance

CE
Interventions

Year 2: Country-to-country
dialogue to share and
demonstrate altemative
approaches to promoting a
“maintenance culture”
Year 3: Public information
strategy through periodic
reporting to broaden awareness
o f Rh4F status

Intermediate
Outcome

Increased clarity b y MCTPC
and other stakeholders on roles
and responsibilities for
managing the RMF

Indicators

Increase in share o f RMF
covered b y national budget
from x to y

Organizational
(businessprocesses and systems)
Low management capacity at the
provincial level in: procurement,
monitoring, financial management,
private sector capacity and village
participation
Weakness in measurement o f
performance
Year 1: Intemational consultancy report
assessing needs and baseline capacities
o f core and support functions
Year 2: Workshop to disseminate
results and develop plan o f action to
implement performance measurement
system across provinces
Year 3: Study completed on functional
benchmarking to improve performance
MCTPC using standardized indicators
to benchmark and measure performance
o f core and support functions
Increase in performance in X number o f
provinces using performance indicators
Increase in the number o f Provinces
autonomously managing core and
support processes

Individual
(Skills)
Low levels o f technical,
administrative and managerial
skills (planning, reporting,
procurement, M&E)

Year 2: MCTPC trains staff in
above key functions
Year 3: MCTPC implements
series o f formal events and
informal teaming activities for
multiple stakeholders
(govemment and contractors)
in key support functions
(financial management,
procurement, and M&E)
Improved competence in
performing technical
administrative and managerial
Increase in number o f staff
meeting benchmarks for core
and support functions

’

Highlighting Capacitv Development at the Proiect Level

The review o f the Bank’s lending portfolio for the Lao P D R revealed that the focus was
often on building capacity for project implementation rather than broader institutional functions;
capacity components are not always w e l l linked to overall development objectives or even project
objectives; a baseline o f existing capacity i s often lacking; and indicators o f progress in
strengthening capacity are not identified. T o remedy past weaknesses, the Country Team
supports integration o f capacity considerations into each phase o f the project cycle. The matrix
below (Table B) provides an illustration o f how this can be done, with reference to the education
project.
New Projects
To integrate capacity considerations into the project cycle, the following steps are
suggested:

1. Concept Note: Review experience o f past projects and sectoral analysis
a. Bank team t o identify capacity constraints at that are likely to affect achievement o f
project objectives.
b. Bank team to assess which capacity development interventions worked well or not in
past projects (by reviewing ICRs, OED, QAG, and supervision reports, for example),
with the goal o f identifying effective (and non-effective) approaches, as well as
possible future partners.

- 72 -

Table B. Sample CD Framework (Second Education Developmc t Project)
Obj

Capacity
Constraints

[nterventions

Indicators

tive: Getting the most vu11 rable into primary schools in the 1 poorest provinces
Individual
Organizational
Institutional
(Skills)
(Business processes and systems)
(Norms, incentives, rules)
Lack o f agreed strategy to
convert NGPES targets into
actions
Insufficient budget allocation
to education programs
Establish national goals for
reading, writing, math, taking
into account variations across
ethnic groups
Focus PRSC on social sector
expenditures

Social sector budget
allocations increased to xx
level

Weak information base on out-of-school
children

M O E education policy division to collect
and analyze data on out-of-school
children
Establish “policy” unit within MOET,
under EDP I 1
M O E to develop and implement testing
protocols

Education Sector Development Program
first stage completed, with focus on
central, provincial and district outcomes
Increased accuracy in data collection and
analysis o f factors leading to school nonenrollment, non-attendance
Policy unit established within MOET,
and producing quality work to be
measured against comparators in the
region
Education management department
established within Education Faculty o f

Little knowledge, at the national,
provincial and local level o f the
MOET, o f ‘what works’
intemationally and regionally
Lack o f trained personnel
Awareness raising workshops
drawing on cross-country
experience
Training programs, curriculum
development

X number o f professors at NUOL
Education Faculty trained

2. PreparatiodPre-appraisal: I n discussions with client and other important donors
a. Bank team to agree on project objectives with client while highlighting and
prioritizing capacity constraints where appropriate.
b. Bank team to detemine whether client has access to data in order to assess baseline
capacity.
c. Client (alone or with consultant funded by preparation grant or other donor) to
prepare baseline o f capacities for priority result areas.
d. , Client, in consultation with Bank team, to develop indicators to monitor progress in
developing capacity needed to achieve project objectives.
e. Bank team /WBI and client to jointly design and develop interventions to mobilize
grant funding, involve institutional partners and share best practice from countries
addressing similar issues to address constraints.

3. AppraisaVNegotiations/ProjectDocumentation
a. Bank team to ensure that documents include reference to actions needed to develop
capacity, committing the team and client to monitor and make progress in key
capacity outcome areas.
b. Bank team and client to determine the role o f local institutions and other learning
partners in supporting project objectives and monitoring capacity development
progress.

4. Project SupervisionLImplementation
a. Bank team to incorporate capacity development into Supervision Framework.

- 73 5. Monitoring and Follow-Up
a. Review progress on capacity building indicators during supervision missions, midterm review, and ICRs.
b. Seek suggestions from client on additional performance indicators.
c. Provide feedbacldguidance, make necessary adjustments, and mobilize additional
resources as required.
Retrofitting Ongoing Projects
Following Board approval, several entry points exist during implementation to
incorporate the capacity framework into ongoing lending.

1. Bank team and government to assess capacity bottlenecks that have emerged during project
implementation, assess experience o f other donors active in the sector.
2. Bank team to review project components (e.g. TA component) to see whether capacity
development objectives are clearly stated and relate to project objectives.
3. Confirm that indicators relating to capacity development component have been identified. If
not, develop indicators, include in monitoring system.
4. Bank team to incorporate capacity development indicators into results matrix for Project
Supervision Report, and Bank team should report on progress.
AAA
Developing capacity should become a goal o f AAA activities. This would imply joint
preparation and dissemination o f AAA in most cases, Important analytical work for Lao PDR in
this CAS period will include development o f sector strategies, for example in rural development
and education, and diagnostic tools such as the Integrated PERs (includes CPARs and CFAAs).
The poverty analysis such as PETS and LECS are outputs that are central to the implementation
of the NGPES. Each o f these activities presents an opportunity to strengthen client analytical
s k i l l s and ownership o f the emerging recommendations. If capacity development i s one o f the
explicit goals o f AAA, time, quality and cost implications o f a more participatory approach would
need to be built into the planning. This approach would require the Bank team at the concept note
stage to:

1. Incorporate retrospective assessments o f client capacity from previous related analytical
work.
2. For the task at hand, break down the main functions and tasks involved, such as data
gathering, analysis, writindsynthesis, and use o f data in policy design and
recommendations.
3 . Determine the incentives and assess the ability o f the client to be able to undertake/ leam
to perform each task.
4. Review available data and options to be able to baseline and benchmark plans for
progress in the client’s own objectives for increased autonomy in analysis and policy
formulation.

- 74 Attachment 3
Lao PDR: Debt Sustainability Analysis
November 2004
(IMP, World Bank and Asian Development Bank joint report)

1.
Lao PDR has an elevated debt burden that places it in the high risk category among
low-income countries. Debt stock ratios are well above the indicative thresholds for countries with
comparable policies and institutions. Although the debt service schedule looks manageable on the
external side, the country’s poor revenue generation indicates that debt service requirements over the
next few years will put pressure o n the government budget, with the risk that priority social
expenditures will be crowded out.
2.
At end-2003 L a o PDR’s stock of public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) external debt, in
NPV terms, was US$1.9 billion. This i s high in comparison to standard macroeconomic indicators,
representing 92 percent o f GDP, 218 percent o f exports, and 534 percent o f public revenues. Based on
this debt stock, staff calculations suggest that Lao P D R i s eligible for HIPC debt relief (Box 1).
3.
Most of Lao PDR’s debt - about 70 percent of the nominal stock at end-2003 comprises concessional loans from multilateral creditors, primarily the World Bank and the
AsDB. The biggest bilateral creditor i s Russia, which accounted for almost 80 percent o f the stock o f
bilateral debt at end-2003. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) account for just under 5 percent o f the
debt-stock.

4.
The stock of Russian debt at end-2003 i s estimated at US$387 million, after applying a
70 percent upfront discount and an exchange rate of 0.6 roubles to the dollar. An agreement was
reached between Lao P D R and Russia in December 2003, which granted an NPV reduction o f about
20 percent o n the consolidated debt stock. [The Lao authorities have subsequently approached Russia
for more concessional terms, which would help them in meeting the high debt service payments
forecast for the near future.]
5.
The debt sustainability analysis indicates that in order for Lao PDR to lower its high
debt stock ratios and debt service-to-revenue ratio over the medium term, three important
conditions need to be satisfied. First, exports and GDP must continue to grow robustly. Second,
fiscal revenues as a percentage o f GDP must continue to rise. Third, public borrowing as a percentage
of GDP must decrease over the medium-term, and care must be taken to maintain a relatively high
average level o f concessionality in n e w borrowing.
Box 1. Lao PDR’s HIPC Eligibility
Lao PDR currently meets the eligibility criteria and fulfills all the conditions necessary to benefit from the
enhanced HIPC Initiative. I t i s a PRGF-eligible and IDA-only country, with a GDP per capita of US320 in 2003.
The NPV o f public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) extemal debt at end-2003, after the application of a stock-of-debt
reduction on Naples terms on Pans Club debt and assuming comparable treatment by all other official bilateral and
commercial creditors, would amount to about $1 billion, corresponding to an NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio of 198
percent Thus the country i s well above the 150 percent threshold required for HIPC under the exports criterion

’.

’.

The Lao authorities have emphasized that they do not intend to avail themselves o f H I P C debt relief. Their view
i s that the transactions costs o f the HIPC procedure and possibly reduced access to bilateral and commercial inflows
would outweigh the gains from debt r e l i e f in the medium-term.
1, This figure i s based upon the application o f the HIPC DSA methodology. It differs from the debt-to-exports ratio shown in Table 1, for
three main reasons First, instead o f a common discount rate of 5 percent on all debt; the HIPC framework utilizes currency-specific discount
rates. Second, it uses a three year backward-looking average of exports in the denominator, rather than current year exports. Third, it assumes
an application of traditional debt relief (Naples terms).
2. Lao PDR does not qualify for HIPC debt r e l i e f under the fiscal criterion, since its revenue-to-GDP ratio i s well beneath the 15 percent
threshold.

- 75 I.Baseline External Sustainability Analysis
6.
The baseline scenario reflects continuing economic reform and good policy
implementation, allowing fairly rapid growth of GDP and exports, and continued fiscal
reforms, leading to a fall in the public sector borrowing requirement over time. The main
increases in real GDP averaging about 6 percent over the
macroeconomic assumptions include (i)
2004-2019 period driven in part by increases in electricity and mineral exports; (ii)increases in
exports in U S $ terms averaging over 9 percent, driven in part by increases in electricity and mineral
a gradual reduction in the public sector borrowing requirement (including SOEs) from
exports; (iii)
6.6 percent o f GDP in 2004 to 5 percent o f GDP by 2019; and (iv) a grant element o f between 40 and
50 percent for future public sector borrowing.

7.
T h e debt stock indicators remain above indicative thresholds throughout the projection
period, despite improving substantially over time (Table 1 and Figure 1). The NPV o f debt-toGDP declines from 58.6 percent at end-2003 to 37.8 percent in 2019. The NPV o f debt-to-exports
follows a similar path, declining from well above 200 percent in 2003 to just under 150 percent by the
end o f the projection period.' Once the construction phase o f the N a m Theun 2 (NT2) dam i s
completed in 2009, debt ratios are projected to improve, o n account o f falling current account deficits,
and robust GDP and export growth (Table 3a).

8.
Debt service indicators suggest a more modest and manageable debt burden both in the
short- and medium-terms. Public external debt service i s projected to average about 9.5 percent o f
exports during the 2004-20 19 period with the projected trajectory remaining relatively flat during this
period (Table 1 and Figure 1). Generally the relatively l o w debt service to exports indicators reflect:
(i)
a stable and relatively high grant element on the debt stock resulting in a relatively l o w debt
high export growth during the period when debt service requirements
service requirement, and (ii)
increase as a result o f the end o f grace periods.
11. Baseline Fiscal Sustainability Analysis

9.
The baseline macroeconomic scenario (Table 2 and Figure 2) i s premised on steadily
increasing government expenditure in the social sectors, thus making the MDGs more
attainable? Hence the scenario depends crucially on fiscal reforms to enable greater revenuegeneration. This would allow the public sector borrowing requirement to fall over time, as described
in the previous section, while keeping expenditures consistent with the Govemment's poverty
reduction strategy. Inparticular, i t i s assumed that tax revenues as a percentage o f GDP rise from 11.3
percent o f GDP in 2004 to 14.5 percent o f GDP in 2019.

10.
Similar to the external analysis, the debt-stock ratios3 start at a very high level and
remain above indicative thresholds throughout, despite falling substantially over the period.
The downward path o f these ratios i s due mainly t o improving revenue performance o n a steadily
rising GDP base, and a falling public sector borrowing requirement.

B o x 2 compares these debt stock indicators, and debt service indicators, t o their indicative thresholds.
Non-interest expenditures rise by 2 percentage points o f GDP over the projection period, f r o m about 16
percent in 2004 to 18 percent in 2019. Assuming that population grows at 2 percent per annum, t h i s i s
equivalent to an increase in dollar expenditures per person o f about 7 percent per annum over the entire period.
As noted in Table 2, o n the fiscal side public debt includes domestic debt (which i s relatively small), and the
analysis uses the L a o PDR fiscal year rather than calendar years.

- 76 11.
The debt service-to-revenue ratio remains high for the next few years, putting priority
social expenditures at risk. Although grants will ease the servicing requirements to some extent4,
any slippage in revenue reforms could lead to an unsustainable debt-service burden, requiring the
authorities to choose between compressing development expenditures and accumulating arrears. The
debt service-to-revenue ratio also underscores the importance o f SOEs borrowing prudently to
finance only commercially viable projects. In the near-term the debt service-to-revenue ratio i s higher
by 4-5 percentage points when SOE debt i s included. If any o f the SOEs were to have difficulty
servicing their debt, i t would add to the already high burden on the Government’s budget.
Box 2: Summary o f Baseline Debt Sustainability Indicators

Note: Figures in italics are under the indicative thresholds.
” Threshold over which countries with similar evaluations o f policies and institutions would have an at least 25
percent chance o f having a prolonged incident o f debt distress in the coming year. Lao PDR l i e s within the bottom
quintile o f countries ranked b y the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment Index (CPIA).

12.
The baseline scenario assumes that the Russian debt i s paid down according to the
schedule agreed in December 2003. T o the extent that the Lao authorities are successful in obtaining
more concessional terms, that would reduce the pressure on the Government budget and either (i)
increase the envelope for social spending or (ii)
reduce the amount o f new loans required over the
near term5, primarily from multilateral donors.

13.
I n the medium-term the debt-to-revenue ratio falls to a more sustainable level,
averaging about 17.5 percent between 2010 and 2019. This trajectory i s due to steady
improvements in revenue as a percentage o f GDP. The N T 2 project will boost GDP significantly
when i t becomes operational, and this, combined with prudent new borrowing, would lower the debt
service burden considerably o n the fiscal side.

As Table 2 shows, the debt-service-to-revenue ratio including grants remains at or just above the indicative
threshold throughout the period.
Although the public sector borrowing requirement falls over time in the baseline scenario, new loans in dollar
terms increase due to rapid GDP growth, averaging about U S $ l S O million per annum through the end o f the
decade.

- 77 Box 3: The Effect of NT2 on Debt Indicators

The NT2 project will have a substantial positive impact on external public debt indicators. In 2010, U S $
exports and real GDP are projected to grow at 27 percent and 11 percent respectively, with the commencement
of electricity exports f r o m the project. The relatively small increase in the public debt burden arising f r o m
financing the Government’s participation in N T 2 i s more than offset by the increases in exports and GDP.
The impact o f N T 2 causes the NFV o f debt-to-exports ratio t o fall by about 25 percent, f r o m 181 percent
without the N T 2 project to 156 percent in 2010, and f r o m 162 percent to 146 percent in 2019. The impact o n
the fiscal side i s less pronounced, although s t i l l positive, because o f the small impact o f N T 2 o n both public
sector debt and fiscal revenues. The NPV o f debt-to-revenue ratio falls f r o m 364 percent t o 355 percent in
2010 and f r o m 242 percent t o 233 percent in 2019.

111. Sensitivity Analysis: Alternative Macroeconomic Scenario
14.
Sensitivity analysis i s undertaken on the basis of an alternative macroeconomic scenario
which corresponds t o a slowdown in economic reforms (Tables 1 and 2, and Figures 1 and 2).
This scenario i s chosen for i t s plausibility; despite the N T 2 project and the Oxiana mines, a
slackening pace o f structural reforms could lead to lower growth rates o f GDP and exports in the
medium term, and insufficient fiscal reform could lead to lower revenue generation compared to the
baselineU6
The alternative macroeconomic scenario assumes lower export and GDP growth, and
15.
poor revenue generation. The growth rate o f exports i s 2 percentage points lower than in the
baseline scenario, beginning in 2006. GDP growth i s similarly kept below the baseline f i o m 2006
onwards, and flattens out at 5 percent per annum over the medium term. VAT i s not introduced, and
that administrative reforms such as the centralization o f customs revenue falter over the mediumterm. Hence, tax revenues as a percentage o f GDP stay at their 2004 level o f 11.3 percent o f GDP.
16.
On the external side there i s not much qualitative difference from the baseline. The NPV
o f debt-to-GDP ratio remains above the indicative threshold throughout, following the same declining
path as in the baseline, but only reaching 41 percent in 2019 instead o f 37.8 percent in the baseline.
Similarly, the NPV o f debt to exports declines after 2005 but falls to a ratio o f 190 percent in 2019
instead o f the 146 percent projected under the baseline scenario. The debt service burden remains
manageable throughout under the alternative scenario.
On the fiscal side, the alternative scenario emphasizes the risk to the government budget
17.
due to debt servicing requirements in the near term. The NPV o f debt-to-revenue ratio again
remains above the indicative threshold throughout, but n o w it does not fall below 300 percent. The
debt-service burden as a percentage o f revenues i s considerably higher in the medium-term. In
particular, over the next few years the debt service-to-revenue ratio i s 2-3 percentage points higher
than the already elevated ratio o f the baseline scenario, and the ratio does not fall below 20 percent
even by the end o f the projection period. If this scenario were to transpire, the fiscal envelope for
social expenditures would be squeezed, greatly impeding the Government’s poverty-reduction
strategy and adversely affecting the attainability o f the MDGs. Consequently, the risk o f debt-distress
would increase markedly.
The alternative scenario considered here is likely to be o f more actual relevance than the standardized
alternative scenarios o f the low-income DSA template, which are premised entirely o n historical patterns.

- 78 IV. Sensitivity Analysis: Bound Tests

18.
The standardized shocks o f the low-income DSA template may not be well suited for
analyzing risks to Lao PDR’s debt sustainability. For example, o n the external side, a very large
negative shock to exports in the first two periods only (as assumed in the template’s stress tests)
seems implausible, because in 2005 the scheduled expansion o f the gold mine and the opening o f a
new copper mine would add US$lOO million to exports. I t would seem more plausible and therefore
more interesting to examine the effect o f a gradual slowdown in the growth rate o f exports in the
medium term. However, for completeness, we also include tables showing the effects o f standardized
shocks (Tables 3a, 3b, 4a and 4b). These tables support the view that the main risk to the baseline o n
the external side i s lower-than-projected exports, while the main risk o n the fiscal side i s poor revenue
effort, leading to a deteriorating primary balance.
IV. Conclusion

19.
L a o PDR currently has an extremely high stock of debt, placing it in the high risk
category among low-income countries. The NF’V o f debt in relation to GDP, exports and
government revenues are all at elevated levels. The analysis undertaken here indicates a high debt
service-to-revenue ratio over the next few years even with improved revenue generation. In the
medium-term the debt service burden i s manageable, but only i f the political will to continue with
economic reforms - especially on the fiscal front - i s maintained.
20.
Sensitivity analysis reveals that if the pace of economic reforms falters, the debt burden,
high even in the baseline case, could become unsustainable. The NPV o f debt-to exports and debtto-revenue would rise from the already elevated levels o f the baseline scenario. The debt service-torevenue ratio would also rise further, making it difficult to maintain or increase the envelope for
social expenditures and putting at risk the Government’s poverty reduction efforts.

- 79 Figure 1. L a o P.D.R.: External Sustainability of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External D e b t
Under Alternative Scenarios, 2003-2019
(Inpercent)

60

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

55
50

45
40

-Baseline

35

-Alternative

Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

30
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio

215
195
175
155

115
135
95

1
-

-Baseline

-Alternative Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

1
1
li

Debt service-to-exports ratio

12
11

10
9
8

7
-Baseline

6

5

Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

-Alternative
~~

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2019

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Export growth i s lower by 2 percent per annum from 2006. Real GDP growth falls to 5 percent by 2009 and
stays at that level.

- 80 -

60

'----

-

55
50

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio

. 1 1 - . . -

- m a

-

45

35

-

30

-

40

-Baseline

---

Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

-Alternative

Including SOEdebt

600

NPV of debt-to-revenue ratio

550
500
450
400
350

---Baseline

300

25 0

Including SOE debt
Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

-Alternative

200
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
30

t

25

-

20

-

15

'-

I

I
I

-

=

*.

-

2015

= Including SOEdebt

1

-

1

I . I

2017

2018

2019

-

Macroeconomic Scenario 1/

-Alternative

u

2016

-Baseline

.
L

2014

- - - " -

-

-

-

I

-

-

I

I

I

10

I

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Fiscal revenues are assumed to remain at 11.3 percent of GDP.

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

- 81 -

00

0

@

x
U

r-

2v

'"

9

09

3

2

v

vi

z

1
3

2

vi

i

2

v

3
oc

3

m

i

vi

v

3

x xm

2

s!

6

CQ

+

2

2

6

2

2

2

i

3

h

3

2

.

09

w

p:

vi

x

2

1

U

vi

8.

'?

3!

3

.
3

.
3

- 82 9

i

;
;
'?

?

'?

D

'9

?

r-

c

9

D

9

D

q

M

3

m

- 83 -

: 0
'
* o
0

- 84 Table 3b. L a o P.D.R.:Sensitivity Analyses for K e y Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed Extemal Debt, 2003-19

(Inpercent)

Estimate
2003

2004

2005

Projections

2006

2001

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2019

NPV o f debt-to.GDP ratio
Baseline

59

54

53

52

52

52

51

41

46

45

44

38

59
59
59
59
59
59

55
57
69
57
64
75

54
61
79
56
73
73

53
60
78
55
72
72

53
59
78
55
12
72

53
59
77
54
71
71

52
58
76
53
70
70

48
54
71
50
65
65

47
52
69
48
64
64

46
51
68
47
62
62

45
49
66
46
61
61

39
41
57
39
51
52

Bound Tests
8 I,Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation i n 2004-05
82 Export value growh at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004.05 I1
83 US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
84 Net non-debt creating flows st historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05 21
85 Combination of 8 1-84 using one-half standard deviation shock
86 One-ti= 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline i n 2004 31

NPV o f debt-to-exportsratio
Baseline

218

213

187

175

180

185

188

156

158

159

160

146

218
218
218
218
218
218

213
269
213
223
226
213

187
351
187
197
245
187

175
327
175
184
229
175

180
336
180
190
236
180

185
344
185
195
242
185

188
348
188
198
246
188

156
289
156
204
156

158
291
158
166
206
158

159
291
159
166
201
159

160
290
160
166
207
160

146
256
146
150
187
146

103

95

93

95

10.0

8.5

85

87

9.0

9.3

Bound Tests
81 Real GDP growth 81 historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
82 Export value growth 81 historical average minus one standard deviation i n 2004-05 11
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004-05
84 Net "on-debt creating flaws at historical average ndnur one standard deviation i n 2004-05 21
85 Combination of B 1-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
8 6 O n e - t i n 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 31

164

Debt service ratio
Baseline

7.2

119

7
7
7

1
14
1

2

7
7

1

2

Bound Tests
81 Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2004.05
82. Export vitiue growth at historical average minus One standard deviation i n 2004-05 I/
83 US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation i n 2004-05
B4 Net "on-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation i n 2004-05 21
85 Combination o f 61-84 using one-half standard deviation shocks
86 One-ti= 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2004 31
Memorondurn rlem:

Grant e l m " assunled on residual financing (i e , financing required above baseline)

7

48

I2
13

48

2

17
10
13

48

1
1
1

16
10

12

48

0
0
0

9
16
9
9
I2
9
48

9
9
9

16
10

12

48

9
9
9

17
10
13

1
1
1

48

Source. Staff projectiorv and simulations

I 1Exports values are a s s u d to remainpcrmnently at the lower level. but the current account 8s a share o f GDP i s assunul l o rstum to illbaseline Isvd sRsr the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustnnt in impart levels)

21 Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
31 Depreciation i s defined as percentagedecline in dollarnocal currency rate. such h a t it never exceedi 100 percent

0
14
0
9
II

0

48

8
I5
8
9

8

8

8

11

48

8

16
9
II

48

9
9
9

17
10
12

4

9
9
9

9
17
9
10
12
9
48

- 85 -

i o ? ? ? ? ?

*PLOZLO

3::

: ' ? w q w w

'LOPQ'ZLO
C
"
OW

io??+?--:

L O r - O N W

8%-

- 86 Table 4b. Counuy: Sensitivity Analyses for K e y Indicators of Public Sector Debt, 2003-2019

Estimate
2003

2004

2005

2006

Projections
2007
2008

2009

2015

2019

NPV of Debt-to.GDP Ratio
Baseline

59

55

53

53

53

52

51

39

34

58
58
58
58
58

54
62
60
74
60

53
68
65
70
58

53
67
64
69
57

52
66
63
67
57

52
65
62
65
56

51
63
60
63
54

41
49
47
48
43

38
43
41
41
38

532

482

458

446

429

407

392

285

237

527
527
527
527
527

476
549
53 1
653
533

456
586
557
604
499

444
561
535
577
483

427
535
511
546
463

407
506
483
513
438

392
485
463
489
421

298
356
340
343
312

260
297
285
286
265

14

20

24

24

23

22

22

18

15

14
14
14
14
14

20
20
20
22
20

25
28
27
29
27

25
29
28
29
26

25
28
21
28
26

24
27
26
27
25

24
26
25
26
24

22
30
28
25
25

22
28
26
24
24

B. Bound tests
B 1. Real GDP growth i s at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
B2. Primary balance i s at historical average ininus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
B3. Combination of 2-3 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4 One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004
NPV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio
Baseline
B. Bound tests
B 1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
B2. Primary balance i s at historical average ininus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
B3. Combination of 2-3 using one half standard deviauon shocks
84. One time 30 percent real depreciation i n 2004
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase i n other debt-creating flows in 2004
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio
Baseline
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
B2. Primary balance i s at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2004-2005
B3. Combination of 2-3 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One time 30 percent real depreciation i n 2004
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2004
Sources: Lao P.D.R. authorities, and staff estimates and projections.

- 87 -

- 88 -

- 89 -

E

&

E
m

- 90 -

- 91 -

- 92 -

- 93 -

- 94Attachment 5
Environmental Sustainability in Lao PDR
State o f the Environment
Lao P D R i s well endowed with natural resources including forests, freshwater and
wildlife, Table 1 compares Lao PDR with some o f i t s neighbors. K e y indicators are presented in
Table 3. The Govemment o f Lao PDR has made important strides in partnership with local
communities and international organizations in instituting changes that could slow the pace o f
natural resources degradation. Recent institutional achievements include: enacting an
environmental impact assessment decree; strengthening the regulation for wildlife trade in
endangered species; creating a specialized agency to protect and manage the Nakai N a m Theun
Watershed; decentralizing environmental functions to provinces; improving water and air quality
monitoring; and establishing a third-party monitoring protocol to report on environmental impacts
o f development projects. Furthermore, sustainable management o f the country’s natural resources
and responsible governance o f the benefits accrued from their use have been identified as integral
parts o f the Government’s recently approved National Growth and Poverty Eradication Strategy
(NGPES).
Table 1: Comparison o f Environmental Indicators among Mekong Countries

I Population (million persons)
I L a n d area (sq.km.)
I Forest (1,000 sq.km.1
Deforestation (average annual % change

1990-2000)

I
1
I

1

1 Landunderprotection(% oftotalland) I
I Water use (% o f total resources)
1

5.5

236,800
126
0.4
14
0.3

I
I
I

1

I
1

13.3
181,040
93
0.6
18
0.1

I
1
I

I

I
1

64.8
515,113.6
148
0.7
18

8

I
I
1

1

I
1

82.7
331,114
98
-0.5

6

C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)

0.1

0.1

3.2

0.6

Access to an improved water source (%
of POP.)
Access to improved sanitation facilities
(% o f urban pop.)

35

30

80

56

29

58

97

86

Environmental expenditure (% o f total
expenditure

I

da

I

1.2-14

I

0.8-1

I
I
I

I

I
I

I

Recognizing that the country’s natural resource base i s important for the country’s future
prospects, the Government o f Lao PDR has invested in improving environmental management by
adopting (1999) and implementing (2002) the Environmental Protection Law. Regulations have
been introduced for conducting impact assessments o f development projects and sector-specific
Environmental Assessment regulations have been developed for hydropower and electricity as
well as road development. The Forest L a w o f 1996 and i t s various enabling implementation
decrees and regulations support measures to improve the protection o f forests and protected areas.

-

95-

The Government i s currently finalizing i t s National Environment Strategy (NES), which includes
a new National Environmental Action Plan for 2006-2010. The key components will focus on: (i)
sustainable management o f renewable natural resources; (ii)improved environmental
management o f industrial and infrastructure sectors, and (iii)
strengthening o f the institutional
framework for environmental management and capacity building. The N E S will be accompanied
by 18 Provincial Environment Strategies and Action Plans. Over the past five years, many sector
specific strategies and action plans have also been prepared focusing o n Water, Biodiversity,
Agriculture and Forestry.
Despite this progress, environmental conditions in the country remain threatened deforestation has increased, threats to protected areas are rising, and urban environmental
problems are n o w emerging. Highlighted below are some o f the key environmental challenges in
Lao PDR that continue to hinder the progress made to date and the future o f natural resource
preservation over the short to medium-term.
Forest and land resources are under pressure
Nearly 90 percent o f the country i s occupied by forest lands (twice the average forest cover

for EAP countries). Despite the introduction o f protected areas, land shifting to agriculture
and illegal logging have led to a decline in forest cover (from 70 percent to 47 percent over
the last 50 years) and therefore to the destruction o f natural habitats. In a number o f upland
forest areas, deforestation i s mainly a result o f logging and unregulated commercial
exploitation. In addition, local pressures include unsustainable exploitation practices,
shifting agriculture, and poverty, all o f which are putting pressure o n the remaining forests.
Commercial logging i s permitted only in areas with forest management plans, and logged
areas must be replanted and well-maintained. Since logging i s prohibited in protected areas
the pressure o n production forests i s enormous, often leading to clear-cutting and forest
degradation.
The Government has identified and will soon formalize the creation o f a system o f National
Production Forest Areas (NPFA) covering an initial eight regions, totaling 500,000
hectares. This system will include formal arrangements with local communities that
prescribe benefit sharing, increased participation, and empower communities to use forest
revenues for local development efforts. In an effort to conserve i t s forest resources and
biodiversity, a National Protected Area system has also been established covering almost
3.4 million hectares, or more than 14 percent o f the country. I t would be useful for the
Govemment to consider applying this approach to the commercially valuable forest outside
o f the protected areas which would benefit an additional 1.5 million people. Participatory
forestry, through which local people are enabled to manage and directly benefit from the
sale o f timber and other forest resources, has had a remarkable and demonstrated success in
Lao PDR. This, and other improved commercial forest management approaches, if applied,
will deter illegal and uncontrolled logging, and form the core o f a viable forestry reform
program.
Despite having a l o w population,density, with an annual population growth o f 2.8 percent,
the pressure o n land resources for cultivation i s rapidly increasing. The Government’s
long-term goal i s to establish a nationwide land administration system and provide secure
tenure to all eligible land holdings. T o achieve this goal, the government needs to accelerate
land titling activities.
The pressure o n suitable land for agriculture i s further aggravated by the fact that Lao PDR
was subjected to heavy bombing during the Indochina war, resulting in large areas o f
dangerous unexploded ordnance-ridden land throughout many parts o f the country.

-

96-

Water resources andpotential of hydropower
0
L a o PDR’s freshwater resources are the most abundant in Asia on a per capita basis, with
total renewable water resources estimated at 190 million m3 per year. Currently there i s
relatively little competition between the various users o f water because o f the relative
abundance o f water and the small population. Total water usage i s relatively limited,
estimated at 1 billion m3per year in 20001. An estimated 90 percent i s used for agriculture
purposes, while domestic and industrial sources use 4 and 6 percent, respectively. However,
development emphasis on expanding land cultivation and increasing exploitation o f
hydropower development i s putting additional pressure o n the resource base.
0
The hydropower potential o f Lao PDR i s high compared to other countries in the lower
Mekong River Basin, providing the Government with an opportunity to eam foreign income
to support socio-economic development. Hydropower generation has increased five-fold in
the last 25 years, and i s expected to expand by three-fold in the next five years. Over the
next 25 years, Lao P D R has the potential to generate 18 percent o f the 23,000 megawatts o f
hydropower that can be generated in the Mekong River Basin. Nevertheless, the
exploitation o f this hydropower potential needs to be carefully balanced with environmental
and social pressures so as to derive the necessary benefits. The NGPES recognizes the
importance o f the hydropower sector in economic growth and poverty reduction and the
Government acknowledges that hydropower development must be sustainable if i t s
development potential to deliver lasting benefits to Lao P D R i s to be fully realized.
Environmental performance o f this sector has been somewhat lackluster to date, and some
hydropower projects have contributed to significant ecological damage and social issues.
Biodiveristy is threatened
L a o P D R i s one o f the most biodiversity-rich countries in Southeast Asia. O f the 1140
animal and plant species reviewed in 1999’, 319 are considered o f national or global
conservation significance (based o n their limited numbers and limited range). In recent
years a number o f genera and species o f mammals that are new to science (e.g. the Saola
and Giant-Antlered Muntjac), birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish have been identified in
Lao PDR. Commercialization and trade in wildlife products have also increased with
improved access to previously remote areas. Although much wild meat i s consumed within
the country, there i s also a massive illegal trade o f live animals and animal parts from and
into neighboring countries. Having signed the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species in M a y 2004, and due largely to the efforts o f the Ministry o f
Agriculture and Forestry and the Wildlife Conservation Society, as w e l l as a national gun
amnesty, the wildlife trade has become less visible nationwide.
As part o f i t s efforts to conserve i t s biodiversity, more than a fifth o f i t s land area i s under
protection through a network o f 20 National Protected Areas, two Corridors, and several
provincial and district level protected areas supported by laws and decrees. Despite this
designation and the enabling legislation, the allocated budgets and subsequently the levels
o f protection in all o f the protected areas are very low, with reports o f widespread logging
and poaching.
Institutional capacity remains weak
0
The G O L has enacted a wide array o f legislation and regulations for environmental
conservation and protection, and i s party to key global environmental conventions;
however, the capacity to implement and enforce them o n the ground remains weak.
Environmental legislation has evolved quickly in L a o PDR leading to inconsistencies

‘ Source: F A 0 Review of

World Water Resources by Country (2003)(www.fao.org)
Duckworth et al, Wildlife in Lao PDR: 1999 Status Report

-

0

97-

including conflicting provisions, overlapping mandates given to different Ministries, and
lack o f implementing regulations and supporting environmental standards.
Inadequate human resources (2 percent o f public sector staff) and very l o w government
budgets (less that 1 percent o f government budget) significantly constrain the
implementation and enforcement o f ambitious legislation and policies that have been
enacted to protect the country’s vast natural resources fkom environmental degradation.

Urbanization challenges
0
While only 20 percent o f the population live in urban areas (about h a l f the average
percentage in EAP countries), population in those areas are already experiencing
environmental health risks. Although Lao PDR has the largest per capita volume o f
renewable water resources in Asia, access to safe drinking water i s s t i l l insufficient. Only
about 61 percent o f i t s urban population has access to piped water supply. In 2000, an
estimated 67 percent o f the urban population in Lao P D R had access to satisfactory
sanitation facilities.

EnvironmentalLinkages to CAS Objectives
Long-term economic growth and poverty reduction can be significantly undermined by
the over-exploitation and degradation o f the natural resource base. The C A S process recognized
this from the outset and set about mainstreaming environment in the key priority areas that are
important for pursuing sustainable growth and poverty reduction. The CAS embeds environment
and natural resource management as a cross-cutting theme across the four objectives. The
expected outcomes and the instruments supporting their achievement are synthesized below
(Table 2).
Among the main international partners supporting the Government are the Agence
Franqaise de Developpement, Asian Development Bank, Swedish International Development
Agency, and the W o r l d Bank. Support i s provided in environmental protection, capacity building,
forest management, biodiversity conservation and watershed management through activities
aimed at strengthening institutions at the national and provincial levels and financing
infrastructure and services.

-

98-

Table 2: Environmental Outcomes a n d B a n k Instruments
~~

Outcomes

Instruments

1. Strengthened environmental institutions and
instruments through:
e building capacity of central and provincial authorities
to assess and monitor environment impacts, and
improving compliance with environmental and social
safeguards.
building capacities in protected area management,
river basin and watershed management
e Lao
Environment Conservation Fund (LECF)
becoming fully operational and geared to receive NT2
revenuesfor use in priority environmental programs
e improved natural resources management in poverty
reduction programs

Lending
1. Sustainable Forestry for Rural Development
Proiect (FY03) The objective o f the project i s
to assist in sustainable management o f
production forests t o alleviate rural poverty in
selected provinces by implementing the
Government’s forest policy reform actions

2. N T 2 demonstrates socially and environmentally
responsible natural resource management through:
a improved management of 400,000 hectares of
protected areas;
resettledpopulation of 6200people in the Nakai
plateau have access to safe water and sanitation and
adapt to environmentally appropriate livelihood and
farming practices (community forest management,
integrated pest management, etc.)
e divers$ed livelihood opportunities designed, piloted
and mainstreamed for those living in the downstream
areas to compensate for poor water quality
e strengthened capacity of WMPA, E M U and NTPC to
monitor and reduce social and environmental impacts
o f natural resource projects
3. Increased area under sustainable forest management
through:
e approving and applying key regulations and
improving revenue generation
e broad-based participation and equitable sharing of
benefits
e reducing illegal land conversions and logging
operations
e expanding overage of sustainable forest management
plans to 528,000 hectares

2. N a m Theun 2 Hvdrouower Proiect and N a m
Theun 2 Social and Environment Proiect. This
project
will
build and operate
an
environmentally and socially sustainable
hydropower plant in Central Lao, and generate
revenues that can be used for poverty reduction
and environmental protection.

3. L a o Environment and Social Proiect (FY05):
This project aims t o improve the environmental
management o f natural assets in Lao P D R t o
alleviate poverty and boost economic growth.
Specifically, the project aims to: (a) strengthen
institutions and instruments for assessment,
monitoring and compliance for environmental
and social sustainability; (b) investing in locallevel
environmental
and
livelihoods
improvement

4. Other Proiects: Rural Development,
Infrastructure and Human Development
projects will be designed t o improve their
environmental outcomes.
AAA
-

1. L a o Environment Monitors (FY05, 07, 09):
The Monitors will undertake diagnostic w o r k
and analytical studies t o assess the state o f the
environment and establish priorities

2. Povertv-Environment Nexus (FY05). This
TA will improve the environmental and natural
resources management coverage o f poverty
reduction efforts
3. Safeguards Thematic Suuervision (FY06).
This will asses the status o f compliance o f the
Bank Dortfolio.

-

99-

Table 3: K e y Environmental and N a t u r a l Resources Indicators
Environmental strategy / action plan prepared in 1995
Group Data
Country Data

East Asia &Pacific

Low Income

Population (millions)

5.5

1,838.50

Urban population (% of total)

20

38.2

2,494.60
30.6

GDP (S billions)

1.65

1,833

1,124

GNI per capita, Atlas method ($)

340

960

430

236.8

15,885

32,424

8

50

43

18.3

34.7

26.3

Fertilizer consumption (100 gramdha arable land)

140

2,077

710

Food production index (1989-91 = 100)

188

171

136

495

568

510

Agriculture

Land area (1,000 sq km)
Agricultural land (% o f land area)
Irrigated land (% o f crop land)
'

Population density, rural (peopldsq km arable land)
Forests

Forest area (1,000 sq km)

126

4,238

9,031

41.5

27.2

27.1

0.4

0.2

0.8

9.2

8.4

Energy use per capita (kg oil equiv)

854

518

Energy imports net (% energy use)

-3

-8

Forest area (% o f total land area)
Annual deforestation (% change, 1990-2000)
Biodiversity

Mammal species, total known

247

Mammal species, threatened

36

Bird species, total breeding

700

Bird species, threatened

27

Nationally protected area (% o f land area)

14

Energy

GDP per unit o f energy use (PPPUkg oil equiv)

3.6

Electric power consumption per capita (kWh)

816

317

Share o f electricity generated by coal (%)

65.1

49.2
0.5

Emissions and pollution

C 0 2 emissions per unit o f GDP (kg/PPP$ GDP)

0.1

0.6

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

0.1

2.1

0.9

42,259

14,561

47

69

64

3

10

6

50,000

6,020

6,416

0.3

7.2

6.5

82

81

92

Access to an improved water source (% total pop)

64

76

76

60

67

70

- urban (% urban pop)

75

93

90

Access to sanitation (% total pop)

44

47

43

- urban (% urban pop)

70

Consumption o f CFCs (ODP metric tons)
Particulate matter (popweighted averagepgim3)
Passenger cars (per 1,000 people)
Water and sanitation

Freshwater resources per capita (m3)

- total (% total water resources)

- agriculture (% total freshwater withdrawal)

- rural (% rural pop)
- rural (% rural pop)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

36
106

'

36

31

72

71

42

121

- 100Group Data

-

Country Data

East Asia & Pacific

Low Income

National accounting aggregates 2002

38.8

21.5

8

9.2

8.4

1.8

2.2

2.6

Energy depletion (“YO GNI)

0

3.4

5.9

Mineral depletion (% GNI)

0

0.3

0.4

Net forest depletion (% GNI)

0

0.1

0.8

C 0 2 damage (% GNI)

0.2

1.8

1.3

Particulate emission damage (% GNI)

0.2

0.8

0.6

25.5

6.7

Gross national savings (% GNI)

Consumption of fixed capital (% GNI)
Education expenditure (% GNI)

Adjusted net savings (% GNI)
Source: The Little Green Data book (2004) and Lao Environment Monitor 2005 (draft)

- 101 -

Lao PDR at a dance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Lao
PDR

East
Asia &
Pacific

Lowincome

5.7
340
1.9

1,855
1,080
2,011

2,310
450
1,038

2.6
2.4

1.o
1.1

1.9
2.3

Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force ("A)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under51
Access to an improved water source ('A ofpopulation)
Illiteracy ("h of population age i5+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

33
25
55
82

2003

I

1.8
19.5
28.4

2.1
22.0
26.5

14.1

16.5

-7.8
0.3
149.5
8.4

-5.2
1.6
88.8
14.6

-5.4
1.7
104.0
16.2
58.6
218.7

2002

2003

2003-07

6.2
3.5

5.8
2.9

5.3
2.5

6.4
3.6

1983

1993

2002

2003

..
..
..
..

57.5
17.7
13.1
24.7

50.4
24.7
19.1
25.0

48.8
25.7

..

9.2
31.2

4.9
33.9

1983-93 1993-03

2002

2003

4.0
10.1
13.0
5.8

2.2
10.0
6.3
6.9

1983-93 1993-03

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

1

2002

Current account balance/GDP
interest paymentslGDP
Total debtlGDP
Total debt serviceiexports
Present value of debtlGDP
Present value of debtlexports

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

1

1.3
21.5

("A of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

I

1993

1983

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

T

I

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentlGDP
Exports of goods and servicesiGDP
Gross domestic savingsiGDP
Gross national savings/GDP

4.8
2.3

Life expectancy

30
58
82
44
75
39
92
99
85

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Development diamond'

40
69
32
15
76
10
111
112
111

37
47

3.7
9.9
12.7
3.8

4.8
10.2
10.7
6.6

-

49

^^

3110/05

~

I

,

I

GNI
Per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

w

1

Access to improved water source
Lao PDR

".--*-*

Low-income group

Economic ratios"

I

Trade
-

I

Indebtedness
.vrr

yyl

Lao PDR
Low-income group

I

I

'
58
~

--

55

00

*GDI

01

02

03

-O'GDP

Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with Its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomDlete.

I

- 102Lao PDR
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1983

1993

2002

2003

10.6
10.6

15.5
13.9

14.4
6.3
-4.0

13.2
5.7
-5.8

1993

2002

2003

24 1
66
9
87
432

341
94
27
105
570
93
0
210

401
94
28
105
618
100
0
231

102
105
97

118
108
109

1993

2002

2003

332
490
-158

517
613
-96

554
673
-119

0

3
51

-70
71

-81
87

Current account balance

-121

-104

-95

-113

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

133
-12

118
-14

150
-55

133
-20

35.0

716.3

196
10,116.0

216
10,572.0

1983

1993

2002

2003

451
0
19

1,985
0
217

1,614
0
435

2,171
0
485

4
0
0

29
0
2

76
0
9

91
0
11

11
58
0
0
0

69
54
0
30
0

115
60
0
60
0

123
75
0
69
0

0
5
0
5
0
4

19
38
1
38
1
36

45
33
6
27
3
24

25
48
7
42
4
38

11.2

Government finance
(“h of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusideficit
TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Wood products
Agriculture
Manufactures
Total imports (ci9
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1983

29
99

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (7995=100)
Terms of trade (7995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

Inflation (%)
150 7

1983

Q8

99

...........

01

00

GDP deflator

02

03

-CPI

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
700

97

99

98

00

01

Evorts

02

03

mlmports

I

Current account balance t o GDP (%)

I

I

F257

I

”

D 8%

A - IBRD
B .IDA
C .IMF

.

D Other multilateral

E . Bilateral
F - Private

G -Short-term

~~

Development Economics

3110105

- 103 -

Annex B2

-

CAS Annex B2 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Selected indicators** of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 03/10/2005

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (%) *
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)’
Supervision Resources (totat US$ millions)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

*

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2002

2003

2004

2005

12
3.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
24.0

12
3.1
0.0
0.0
8.3
16.1
25.8

12
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
25.9

12
3.2
11.1
6.5
11.1
6.5
10.0

No
0.65
50,000

No
1.006
71,857

No
1.061
75,786

No
1.208
80,533

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
23
6
442.3
105.3
34.8
16.7
19.3
2.4

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). FY2005 includes
nine projects under implementation and three projects to be delivered in FY2005.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank‘s country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank’s portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. The supervision resources include supervision costs charged to the projects (including GEF projects)
and COSU staff working on supervison not directly charged to the proejcts. They exclude the
resources spent on portfolio management.
g. For FY05, they are planned resources (including GEF projects); also include resources for ICRs.
* Informal quarterly CPPRs (QPPRs) were conducted each year.
** All indicators are for projects active in the portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

- 104 -

Annex 63

-

CAS Annex B3 Lao People's Democratic Republic
IBRDhDA Program Summary
As of 03/10/2005

Proposed IBRDADA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year

2005

US$(M)

Project

Strategic Rewards
(H/M/L)
H
H
H
H

Implementation
Risks (H/M/L)
L
H
H
H

PRSC 1
Nam Theun Social & Environment
Lao Environment and Social Project
Nam Theun 2 Guarantee

10.0
20.0

Health Services Improvement Project

15.0

H
H
H

H
M
M

2007

PRSC 3
Public Financial Management TA
Khammouane Rural Livelihoods
GMS Regional Power Trade

8.0
3.0
7.0
5.0

H
H
M
H

H
M
M
H

2008

PRSC 4
Sectoral SWAP
Rural Provincial Infrastructure 2

8.0
6.0
6.0

H
M
H

H
M
M

2006

Overall Total

4.0

13.0

128.0

Note: The program is merely indicative. Actual size of projects (IDA Credits and Grants), timing, and overall annual commitments will depend on the
availability of IDA resources through the continuing Lending Strategy Review (LSR) exercises (in particular, in light of IDA-14 outcomes), the status of project
preparation, and the definition of the project and components to be financed by IDA to be agreed with the government and other cofinancing partners.

H : High

M : Medium

L : Low

- 105 -

Annex B3

-

CAS Annex B3 Lao People's Democratic Republic
IFC and MlGA Program
FY 2002 2005

-

As of 03/10/2005

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)
Information
Oil, Gas and Mining
Total

2002

2003

2004

2005

16.00

0.00

0.00

4.00

100
100

100

0

0

100

Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

25
6
100

0

0

100

MIGA guarantees (US$"

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

69

100

~

-

- 106 -

Annex B4

CAS Annex B4 Lao People's Democratic Republic
Summary of Nonlending Services
As Of 0311012005

Completion FY

Audience a

Objective

Recent completions
Economic Monitors
Private Sector NoteKonference
Mining Sector
IDF-Public Expenditure and Debt Management
SS R/CEM
Economic Monitor (1st Issue)
Economic Monitor (2nd Issue)
Dialogue on Mining Sector
PRSP - JSA

FY03
FY03
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05

GOV, Bank, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor

BSP, KG, M, PS
DP, BSP, KG, M
DP, BSP, KG, M, PD
GOV, KG, M, PD
DP, BSP, KG, PD, PS
KG, M, P
KG, M, P
DP, BSP, KG, M
BSP, M,

Underway
Expenditure Tracking/Poverty Assessment
Rural Sector Issues Note
Financial Sector Issues Note
IDF-Efficiency in Public Procurement
Economic Monitors
Environment Monitor
Contract Value Norms Study

FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD

BSP, B, KG, M
BSP, B, KG
BSP, B, KG
GOV, DP, M
KG, M, P
KG, M, P
BSP, KG, P

Planned
PSNInvestment Climate Survey
Khammouane Provincial Dev. Study
Integrated Trade Framework
Integrated PER (with CFAA, CPAR)
Social Protection Policy Note
Education Sector Study
Economic Monitors
Peer Review of State Audit Organization
IDF-Ethnic Minorities concerns in PRSP
IDF-Monitoring and Evaluation in Education

FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, PD
GOV, Bank

BSP, B, KG
BSP, DP, KG, SD
BSP, KG
BSP, KG, M
BSP, DP, SD
BSP, KG, P, SD
KG, M, P
PS, DP, PS
GOV, KG, P, PD
GOV, KG, M

CEM
Civil Service Reform Study
RD Sector Strategy
Infrastructure Strategy
Decentralization Study
Financial Sector Assessment
Economic Monitors
Environment Monitor
Expenditure Tracking Survey

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07

GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD
GOV, Bank, Donor, PD

BSP, DP, KG
BSP, KG
BSP, KG, SD
BSP, KG, SD, PP, PS
BSP, KG
BSP, DP, KG
KG, M, P
KG, M, P
BSP, DP, M, KG

HD Sector Strategy
Gender & Ethnic Minorities Assessment
Investment Climate Follow-up
Poverty Assessment
Integrated PER
Social Sector Monitor
Economic Monitors

FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08

GOV,
GOV,
GOV,
GOV,
GOV,
GOV,
GOV,

DP, KG
DP, KG
DP, PD
BSP, B, KG, M
BSP, KG, M
KG, M, P
KG, M, P

Product

Bank, Donor
Bank, Donor
Bank, Donor,
Bank, Donor,
Bank, Donor,
Bank, Donor,
Bank, Donor,

PD
PD
PD
PD
PD

a. Government (GOV), Donor, Bank, Public Dissemination (PD)
b. Government (GOV); Bank Group (B); Bank Group Strategy Preparation (BSP); Public, including civil society (P);
Policy Discussion (DP); Monitoring (M); Knowledge Generation (KG); Public Debate (PD);
Problem Sovling (PS); Project Preparation (PP); Stakeholder Discussin (SD).

- 107 -

Annex B5

-

CAS Annex B5 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Social Indicators
As of 0311 012005

Same regionlincome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1970-75

1980-85

1997-2003

East
Asia &
Pacific

3.0
2.2
11.4
6.5

3.6
2.4
15.6
6.5

5.7
2.6
25.2
4.8

1,854.5
1 .o
39.7
2.1

2,310.3
1.9
30.3
3.7

1,080

450

1 .o
1.9

1.9
3.2

1.2
2.7

81
84
77

92
92
92

78
84
72

37
61
29

76
93
67

75
90
69

6
4

71
56
40

70
78
15

64
64
44

42
41
44

47
46
49

55
54
57

69
68
71

58
57
59

145
218

135
200

82
115

32
42

82
126

610
510

531
439

355
299
650
19

184
129

31 9
268

68

38

POVERTY
(“7 of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

33.0
20.0
38.0

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1 995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

340
1,083

INCOMWCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (%of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(‘7 of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(“7 of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (1 5-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Lowincome

33.0
7.6
45.0

0.4

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.
World Development Indicators database August 2004, World Bank

- 108 -

-

Annex B6

CAS Annex B6 Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Key Economic Indicators
As of 03/10/2005
Actual
Indicator

Estimate

Projection

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

100
52.1
22.7
24.4

100
50.8
23.5
24.8

100
50.4
24.7
25.0

100
48.8
25.7
25.5

100

100

100

100

100

20.9
14
6.9

20.9
13.5
7.4

19.5
10.9
8.6

22
11.9
10.1

18.9
8.8
10.1

19 7
8.7
11.1

20.7
8.5
12.1

20.7
8.7
12.0

20.8
9.0
11.8

29.9
34.8

28.3
33.3

28.4
33.9

26.5
32.2

25.6
33.6

28.3
32.2

29.9
34.5

28.8
33.9

27 8
33.3

19.4

17.1

14.1

16.5

10.4

12.1

10.5

10.3

10 3

1,740

1,762

1,818

2.088

2,412

2.665

2,895

3,125

3.375

310

320

340

380

400

420

5.8

5.8

5.8

53

6.0

7.0

6.5

5.8

58

2.7

2.9

25

3.4

4.4

3.9

3.2

520.4
344.8
608.4
562.4
-86.0
136.2

499.5
333.6
586.2
542.2
-86.7
64.9

516.7
340.5
616.6
570.1
-99.9
71.1

554 0
401 0
673 2
618 2
-1192
86 9

617.3
437.3
810.1
752.2
-192.8
96.9

753.9
563.1
857.9
764.1
-104.0
102.7

865.3
663.0
998.6
864.2
-133.3
110.7

900.4
683.0
1058.4
921 .O
-158.0
117.5

938 7
705 0
1123 5
982 9
-184 8
I24 9

-25.2

-66

-99

-1133

-204.3

-209.2

-304.4

-335.1

-366 8

31.3
62.8

23.9
65.8

60.4
126.9

69 4
88 9

186.3
72.2

105.5
184.9

86.1
324.4

88.1
337.9

90 3
342 4

-49.9

-52.8

-26.9

-1 6

-8.7

-40.8

-43.4

-18.1

-5 4

-43.9

0.8

-55.4

-19 8

-29.9

-21 .o

-27.6

-37.8

-35 5

0.0

0.0

-0.1

-0 1

-0.1

0.0

0.0

-0.1

-0 1

National accounts
(as % GDP at current market prices)
Gross domestic product
Agriculture’
Indust$
Services‘
Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
~ x p o r t s(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)
Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings’
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
Gross national product per capita
(US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates
(“h,calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Gross Domestic Income
Real annual per capita growth rates
(“h,calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$m)
~ x p o r t s(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise CIF
Resource balance
Net current transfers
(including official current transfers)
Current account balance
(after official capital grants)
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, inciudlng
errors and omissions)
Change in reserves
Memorandum items
Resource balance (77 of
GDP at current market prices)

(continued)

- 109 Lao People's Democratic Republic

Annex I36

- Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Indicator

Real annual growth rates (1995 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)
Public finance
(as %of GDP at current
market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+)
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
MUGDP (at current market prices)
Growth of M2 (YO)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)

Actual
2001
2002

2003

2005

2006

Projection
2007

2008

0.8

-3.2

2.1

17.8

9.0

28.8

17.8

3.0

3.2

1.5

-3.6

5.1

8.4

21.7

1.6

13.1

6.6

6.7

13.2
7.7

13.2
7.8

13.1
8.1

11.1
7.5

11.2
7.9

11.4
8.5

11.8
8.7

12.3
9.3

12.8
9.4

-1.4
13.3
5.7

-3.7
12.6
3.1

-5.4
10.1
3.3

-5.4
11.2
5.2

-8.5
7.6
3.7

-7.9
8.7
4.1

-10.5
8.6
3.8

-10.7
8.5
3.7

-10.9
8.8
3.6

15.6

16.9
7.8
27.6

17.6
12.9
-5.2

17.6
24.1
5.4

17.9
28.7
6.6

17.8
11.7
14.4

23.2
25.1

7.8
8.5

10.6
10.6

15.5
13.9

10.5
7.7

6.2
7.0

5
5.7

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

2000

Estimate
2004

Price indices( 1995 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate
(LCU/US$)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% growth rate)
GDP deflator (% growth rate)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

GDP estimated at factor cost.
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Central Government,
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation

- 110Lao People's Democratic Republic

Annex B6

- Selected Indicators Table

Actual
2000

2001

Estimate

Projection

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Part A: Main Macro Aggregates
Annual growth rates, calculated from constant 1995 price data
GDP (mp) per capita
Total consumption per capita

GDP at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Gross domestic investment (GDI)
Gross dom. fixed investment (GDFI)

5.8

5.8

5.8

5.3

6.0

7.0

6.5

5.8

5.8

Exports (GNFS)
of which Goods
Imports (GNFS)
of which Goods

-4.4
-9.7
-9.7
-9.1

0.3
1.1
1.o
0.7

6.1
4.7
7.2
7.9

-0.7
8.0
0.3
-0.6

1.2
0.1
10.9
11.7

18.2
24.7
2.5
-1.7

12.6
15.5
14.2
10.9

1.9
0.9
3.8
4.4

2.1
1.1
3.9
4.5

3.7
17.1
8.2
8.9

5.4
14.1
6.1
8.0

5.5
16.5
5.4
11.o

8.5
10.4
4.8
5.6

7.9
11.9
4.6
7.3

10.5
10.2
4.7
5.5

10.7
10.0
4.9
5.1

10.9
10.0
5.3
4.7

7,878
102

8,913
97

10,115
98

10,572
102

7.8

12.9

24.1

19.5

18.0

13.2
10.7
20.7
7.4
-3.7
4.4
3.1
1.6
0.0

13.1
10.6
18.4
7.2
-2.8
2.8
3.3
-1.3
1.8

11.1
9.1
19.0
7.2
-5.8
6.4
5.2
1.1
0.0

11.2
9.3
15.9
7.8
-3.9
3.9
4.1
0.2
0.0

11.4
9.5
17.4
8.4
-4.1
5.1
4.1
1.o
0.0

11.8
9.8
17.6
8.6
-3.9
4.7
3.8
1.o
0.0

12.3
10.5
18.0
9.3
-3.8
4.6
3.7
0.9
0.0

12.8
11.0
18.4
9.4
-3.7
3.7
3.6
0.1
0.0

84

76

91

117

122

125

121

198

Savings-investment balances, as percentage of GDP
Gross Domestic investment
of which Government investment

Foreign savings
Gross national savings
Government savings
Non government savings
Gross domestic savings
Other
GDP inflation
Annual average exchange rate (LCWUSS)
Index real average exchange rate ( =loo)
Terms of trade index ( =loo)
Incremental capital-output ratio (GDI based)
Import elasticity with respect to GDP
Money growth

7,012
100

NA
NA
NA

Part 8 : Government Finance Indicators
Percentage of GDP
Total revenues, of which
Tax revenues
Total expenditures, of which
Consumption
Deficit(-)/Surplus(+)
Financing:
Foreign
Monetary sector
Other domestic

13.2
10.6
21.5
7.7
-4.1
4.6
5.7
-0.8
0.1

Other
Total DebVGDPmp
Total interest paymentsflax revenues

Part C: Debt & Liquidity Indicators
Total DOD and TDS
DOD (US$ millions)
DOD / GDPmp ratio
TDS (US$ millions)

(continued)

- 111 Lao People's Democratic Republic

Annex B6

- Selected Indicators Table

(Continued)
Actual
2000

TDS / exports (XGS) ratio
Total gross reserves (months' imports G&S)
Part D: External Financing Plan
(US$, millions)
Official capital grants
Private investment (net)
Net Long term borrowing excl IMF
Adjustments to scheduled debt service
Ail other capital flows
Financing Requirements (incl IMF)
of which current account deficit

Estimate

Projection

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

16.7
2.6

14.6
3.5

16.2
3.2

19.0
3.9

16.2
4.2

14.4
4.3

13.4
4.5

21 .o
4.5

- 112 -

Annex B7

-

CAS Annex B7 Lao People's Democratic Republic
Key Exposure Indicators
As of 0311012005

Actual

Estimate

lndlcator

2000

2001

2002

2003"

2004

2005

2006

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

1,447

1,458

1,614

2,171

2,244

2,418

Net disbursements (US$m)a

24

59

203

145

147

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$""

81

84

76

91

278.3
83.2
15.5
59.0

291.6
82.7
16.7
62.6

312.2
88.8
14.6
60.2

21.4
77.0
1.3
393.6

18.0
71.6
1.3
406.6

0
0
0

0
0
0

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO~XGS~
TDOlGDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionalflDO
IDA exposure indicators (%)
IDA DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)
IDA DSMGS
IDA TDO (us$mld
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IBRD TDO (us$mld

Projected
2007

2008

2,710

3,031

3,356

251

377

403

413

117

122

125

121

198

387.7
104.0
16.2
72.8

363.5
93.0
19.0
75.1

320.7
90.7
16.2
71.4

313.2
93.6
14.4
61.5

336.6
97.0
13.4
53.2

357.5
99.4
21.o
46.6

24.9
79.4
1.8
435

29.8
85.1
2.1
484.8

21 5 0
61.1
2.4
515.4

16.50
48.8
1.7
556.5

16.90
49.7
1.6
607.1

18.40
55.5
1.7
660.7

19.30
57.8
1.8
721.1

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity
MlGA
MlGA guarantees (US$m)
l/.
Includes Soviet-era Russian debt of US$387 million for the first time under outstanding debt. Data before 2003 are unreliable.
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. " X G S denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

- 113 -

x

(0

d

a

m
X

C

4

x

(D

d

- 114-

Annex 88

Lao People's Democratic Republic

Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
Amounts in US Dollar Millions
As Of 03110/2005

FY Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

1998
1998/2000
2001

SEF Endeavor
SEF Settha
SEF Villa Santi

0.15
0.86
1.15

0
0
0

2.16

0

Total Portfolio:

Held
Quasi

Approvals Pending Commitment
2005

Millicom Lao

Total Pending Commitment:

Loan
4
4

Disbursed
Equity
Quasi

Partic

Loan

0
0
0

0
0
0

0.15
0.86
1.15

0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0

0

0

2.16

0

0

0

Equity
0

Quasi
0

0

0

-

Partic
0

0

Partic

- 115 -

Annex 810

-

CAS Annex B10 Lao People's Democratic Republic
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
As of 0311 QI2QQS

Network area

Country
performance

Major issue

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
Excellent
Rural poverty; rising urban inequality
Poverty reduction
Good
Pace of reform; fiscal decentralization; fiscal
Economic policy
deficits; external debt; institutional capacity
Fair
Weak capacity; pace of PEM and SOE reforms;
Public sector
administrative decentralization
Good
Education and employment gaps; maternal
Gender
mortality
Human Development
Education

Fair

Health, nutrition &
population

Fair

Social protection

Poor

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Fair/Poor
Access to services; access to credit; banking
supervision; regulations
Fair

Energy & mining

Good

Infrastructure

Good

High
High

Bank
priority

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
priorities

High
High

Moderate High

PRSCs

Moderate Moderate

Low literacy rate; gender and regional gaps; low High
completion rates; lack of trained teachers;
teachers' salaries (low and in arrears); female
secondary education;
High
Low utilization rates; poor quality of services;
health workers' salaries (low and in arrears);
high child mortality rate
Low
Limited services

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development
Rural development
Good
Rural infrastructure; diversification
Environment
Good
Sustainable natural resource management;
forestry; hydropower
Social development
Fair
Regional and urban/rural disparities; limited
participation; weak civil society

Private sector

Country
priority

High
High

High

High
Moderate Other donors
providing support;
Social Protection
Policy Note
High
High

Moderate Moderate

Low

High

PRSCs; FMCBC
projects; Financial
Sector Strategy

Regulatory/licensing environment;export
competitiveness
Hydropower development; revenue
management; environmental safeguards

High

High

High

High

Inadequate maintenance; weak management
capacity; rural accessibility

High

Moderate Other donors
providing
substantial
support;
Infrastructure
strategy

MAP SECTION

IBRD 33431
100°E

102°E

104°E

106°E

108°E

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

CHINA
LAO P.D.R.
To
Lincang
To
Gejiu
To
Daluo

Ou

Gnot-Ou

22°N

22°N

Phongsaly
Boun-Nua

PHONGSALY
PHONGSALY
LUANG
NAMTHA

BOKEO

Nambak

ng
Be

Ban
Ta
Huaisai
To Chiang Rai

u

Sam-Neva

LUANG
PHRABANG

OUDOMSAI

Xiangkhoang Plateau

SAY
SA
SAYABOURY
YABOUR
ABOURY
Y
Sayaboury

XIANG
KHOANG
Xaisomboun

Ban Nalé
Nalé

VIENTIANE

Nam Ngum
Reservoir

BOLIKHAMSAI
Paksane
Khamkeut

Kadi
ng

18°N

ng

ko

VIENTIANE

Xanakham

Me

18°N

M

n

g

Gulf of
Tonkin

Phou Bia
(2,817 m)

Vangviang

Pone
Hong

Kham

Xiang
Khoang

Kasi

o

20°N

Plain of Jars

Nan
Phokhoun

ek

Viangxai

HOUAPHAN

Luang
Phrabang

Pakbeng

Paklay

To
Hanoi

Xiangkho

Muang
Xai
O

kon
Me

Meung

VIET NA M

Muang
Khoa

Luang
Namtha

g

MYANMAR

KHAMMOUANE

PREFECTURE OF
VIENTIANE MUN.

Cammon Plateau

0

100 Kilometers

50

25

50

75

LAO PEOPLE'S
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC

fai

Xebangfai

T HA ILA ND

100 Miles

Ba

0

ng

N oy

To
Khon Kaen

To
Vinh

Xe

Thakhek
To
Khon Kaen

Ban Na Phan

SAV
SA
SAVANNAKHET
VANNAKHETXepon

X
Xéno
éno

Savannakhet

Phin

S e B a n g hio n

To
Qui Nhon

g

Samouay

16°N

16°N

SARAV
SARA
VANE
SARAVANE
Saravane
on
D

SEKONG

Khongxedon

Sekong

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

To
Ubon
Ratchathani

PROVINCE CAPITALS

Pakxong

CHAMPASSAK
CHAMP
ASSAK Bolovens
Plateau

Champassak

NATIONAL CAPITAL

Sanamxai

RIVERS

Attapeu

ATTAPEU
A
TTAPEU
TT
APEU

MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS
PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

Khong

14°N

14°N

CA MBO DIA

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
104°E

106°E
NOVEMBER 2004

