Public Disclosure Authorized

DOCUMENT OF
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 31627-DO

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Public Disclosure Authorized

May 19,2005

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
The International Finance Corporation
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

I

This document has restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

T h e date of the last Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report was February 12,2004.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Units: Dominican Peso (DOM)
US$1.O = DOM$28.06 (as of March 3 1, 2005)

Fiscal Year

January 1 to December 3 1

Weights and Measures
M e t r i c System
AAA
ADESJO
AML/CFT
BHD
CAS
CEA
CEI
CEM
CEPAL
CFAA
CPAR
CPI
DR-CAFTA
EU
FDI
FIAS
FSL
FTZ
GDLN
GEF
IBRD
IDB
IFC
IMF
JBIC
MDA
MDGs
MIGA
NGO
OED
ONAPLAN
ONE
PLD
PRD
SBA
SESPAS
SIGEF
SIUBEN
SWAP
ROSC

Abbreviations and Acronyms

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Development Association o f San JosC de Oc6a
Anti-money Laundering and Combating Financing o f Terrorism
Banco Hipotecario Dominicano (Dominican Mortgage Bank)
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Environmental Assessment
Comunidad de Estados Independientes (Community of
Independent States)
Country Economic Memorandum
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Corruption Perceptions Index
Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Fixed Spread Loan
Free Trade Zones
Global Distance Learning Network
Global Environmental Fund
International Bank for Reconstructionand Development
Inter-AmericanDevelopment Bank
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Master Derivatives Agreement
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Non-Governmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
National Panning Institute
National Statistics Office
Dominican Liberation Party
Dominican Revolutionary Party
Stand-by Arrangement
Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance
Integrated Financial Management System
Sistema Unico de Beneficiarios (Unified System for Beneficiary
Selection)
Sector-Wide Approach
Report on the Observance o f Standards and Codes

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNDP
UNICEF
USAID
VAT
WBI

WTO

United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children’s Fund
US. Agency for InternationalDevelopment
Value Added Taxes
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

IBRD
Vice President
Director
Team Leaders

Pamela Cox, LCRVP
Caroline Anstey, LCC3C
Christina Malmberg Calvo and
Massimiliano Paolucci

IFC
Vice President
Director
Unit Manager
Team Leaders

Assaad Jabre, CIOVP
Atul Mehta, CLADR
Eduardo Wallentin
Pierre Nadji and Salem Rohana

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................

THE BANKGROUP
STRATEGY AND PROGRAM ............................................................................... i
AGENDAFOR BOARD
CONSIDERATION
........................................................................................
n

.
...............................................................................................................................
I 1. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT..................................................................................................
I OVERVIEW

1
2

POLITICAL CONTEXT....................................................................................................................
2
ECONOMIC
CONTEXT
.................................................................................................................... 3
POVERTY TRENDS
AND SOCIAL ISSUES
......................................................................................... 8
GOVERNANCE
AND ~ S T I T U T I O N A L
DEVELOPMENT
................................................................... 12

.
................................................................................
I V.PROGRESS ON THE CURRENT BANK GROUP STRATEGY ...................................
V . DONOR COORDINATION.................................................................................................
V I.THE ROLE OF THE BANK GROUP: LOOKING AHEAD ..........................................
I11 THE GOVERNMENT’S PROGRAM

THEWORLDBANKGROUP
LENDING
PROGRAM
.........................................................................
PILLAR 1: STABILIZE THE ECONOMY. IMPROVE COMPETITIVENESS AND RESTORE ECONOMIC
GROWTH

.....................................................................................................................................

PILLAR 2: ACHIEVEGREATERSOCIAL EQUITY .........................................................................
ANALYTICALAND ADVISORY ACTIVITIES (AAAS) ....................................................................

.

....................................................................................................

VI1 PROGRAM AND RISKS

14
15

19

20
21
24
28
30

33

LENDING
PROGRAM AND SCENARIOS ......................................................................................... 33
PROGRAM MONITORING
AND RISKS...........................................................................................
36
COUNTRY FINANCINGPARAMETERS ...........................................................................................
39

.

................................................................................

VI11 PARTICIPATORY CAS PROCESS

42

BOXES

Box 1: LIFEN
I THE BATEYES
.......................................................................................................... 10
Box 2: IFC’s PROJECTSFROM FY2000 TO MARCH 2005 ........................................................ 18
B O X 3: FINANCIAL.PROCUREMENT AND HUMAN
RESOURCE
MANAGEMENT
ISSUES
.................... 26

FIGURE
FIGURE1: GOVERNANCE
INDICATORS
...........................................................................................

13

TABLES
TABLE1: SELECTED MACROECONOMIC
I~\JDICATORS .......................................................................
TABLE2: DOINGBUSINESS:A WEAKJUDICIARY SI EXPENSIVE
...................................................
TABLE3: MAINDEVELOPMENT
PARTNERS
....................................................................................
TABLE4: FY06-09 CAS LENDING
AND ANALYTICALW O R K PROGRAM
.......................................
TABLE5: ONGOING AND PLANNED ANALYTICALAND ADVISORYACTIVITIES ..............................
TABLE6: PROPOSED
IBRD LENDING
SCENARIOS FOR FY06-09....................................................
TABLE7 : LENDING
TRIGGERSFOR THE CAS BASECASE AND HIGHCASE ....................................
TABLE8: IBRD LENDING
AND EXPOSURE
LNDICATORS .................................................................

4
12
19
23
31
33
35
38

ANNEXES

Annex A2: Country at a Glance
Annex A3: Progress on Implementation of FY00-02 Country Assistance Strategy
Annex A4: Progress on Implementation of FY04-05 Country Assistance Strategy
Progress Report
Annex B 1: Dominican Republic and the Millennium Development Goals
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: IBRD Program Summary
Annex B3: IFC and M I G A Program
Annex B4: Summary of Non-Lending Services
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: IBRD Operations Portfolio
Annex B8: IFC Portfolio
Annex C:
Development Objectives Implementation
Annex D: Country Financing Parameters - Supporting Note
CAS Consultations with Dominican Stakeholders
Annex E:
Annex F:
CAS Monitoring Framework
Map:
IBRD No. 33398

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.

After two years o f deep crisis, the Dominican Republic has begun to turn a corner. The
peso has appreciated, inflation has come down, and economic growth has resumed. The new
Government o f Leone1 FernBndez, which took office in August 2004, has assigned priority to
restoring macroeconomic stability and has successfully negotiated a Stand-B y Arrangement
(SBA) with the IMF, approved b y i t s Board on January 3 1,2005.

ii.

Notwithstanding this achievement, formidable challenges remain. Most are related to weak
governance and fragile public institutions. Corruption remains widespread and the Dominican
Republic has yet to fully emerge from the shadow o f i t s caudillist past and embrace the
demands o f a modern state. Other challenges include entrenched inequality and rural poverty,
uncontrolled, rapid urbanization, youth unemployment, and social exclusion. Addressing these
institutional, economic, and social challenges w i l l require far-reaching measures to reform the
public sector and improve the efficiency, transparency and accountability o f the use o f public
funds. I t w i l l also require visible actions to reach poor households with basic social and
infrastructure services, and deliver jobs for the young. This i s a tall agenda, especially in a
highly political environment and in the context o f imminent trade policy changes exposing the
country to new and tougher competition.

...

The Bank Group Strategy and Program

111.

iv.

The guiding principles for the World Bank Group’s assistance program in the Dominican
Republic for the next four years are: (i)
a strategic approach, aimed at steering Bank Group
financing and analytical work to critical areas o f policy reform; (ii)
selectivity, focusing on
areas where the Bank Group has a comparative advantage and where there i s a gap in
assistance; and (iii)active partnering in both lending and analytical work with other
development partners.
The W o r l d Bank Group’s strategy over the four-year period covered b y this CAS (FY0609) supports the Government’s program. I t s over-arching focus i s on improving governance
and strengthening institutions. T w o main Pillars support this focus:

(i)stabilize the economy, improve competitiveness, and restore economic growth; and
(ii)
achieve greater social equity through human development and increased coverage and
quality o f basic public services.
v.

IBRD support w i l l focus on providing technical and financial assistance for electricity
sector restructuring, and public sector modernization and competitiveness with strong
emphasis on combating corruption, and increasing transparency, accountability, and respect for
the rule o f law. The Bank w i l l also support the development and implementation o f a national
wastewater and solid waste strategy. I t will, in addition, accompany the government in
improving targeting o f social programs, increasing access to basic social and infrastructure
services with an emphasis on poor rural and urban areas, women and youth at risk. Through i t s
existing portfolio, IBRD w i l l continue to support financial sector reform, and education and
health sector interventions, including the Government’s HIV-AIDS strategy. As part o f the
assistance program, IBRD w i l l undertake analytical work including a Poverty Assessment, a
Country Economic Memorandum, a study on Public Transport for the Urban Poor, and
informal notes on Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises (SMEs) and money laundering.
I

vi.

IFC ’s assistance w i l l focus on restoring confidence in the private sector supporting projects
generating growth, improving the country’s competitiveness, and contributing towards greater
social equity. IFC’s intervention w i l l be concentrated in areas where the country has a
competitive advantage or that are hard currency earners o f the economy-tourism, mining, and
free trade zone (notably developing inward linkages towards the local economy); and human
resources development (health and education). In other sectors such as infrastructure
(transport and logistics, renewable energy, water and waste management) IFC w i l l support
projects as opportunities arise. I F C w i l l also seek to assist the government reform efforts in the
financial and electricity sectors, b y supporting private sector investment that could result in a
sound regulatory framework.

vii.

MIGA w i l l support projects to diversify i t s portfolio away f r o m concentration in specific
sectors, working with project sponsors who are exploring long-term investments in the country.

...

The preparation o f this CAS, its lending and analytical program, has been done in close
collaboration with the government, and has benefited from consultations at provincial and
national workshops including representatives from local governments, c i v i l society and the
private sector, as well as youth focus discussions. There has been close coordination with the
IDB, and other development partners.

v111.

Managing Risks
ix.

The CAS has three scenarios with different lending volumes and number o f operationslow, base and high. The base case lending scenario includes operations for a total o f US$260
million over four years. The high case lending scenario consists o f US$l.OO million in
commitments additional to the base case, bringing the total lending envelope to US$360
million. In the l o w case scenario, the Bank would support four operations for a total o f
US$110 million. K e y risks are political and institutional in nature and include the
administration’s ability and commitment to maintain macroeconomic stability, steward
important reforms in the public sector, energy sector, and social areas, and make headway on
the anti-corruption agenda. Additional risks relate to natural hazards and their potential impact
on the social sectors and the country’s economy, especially the tourism sector.

x.

The CAS program manages risks through selective interventions and the careful selection
of triggers and monitoring o f progress, scaling fast disbursing lending to policy
implementation progress and results. The Government planning department has committed to
monitor outcomes and strengthen i t s ability to track results. Building on recent positive
experience in the Dominican Republic with c i v i l society monitoring, an increased effort w i l l be
made to involve c i v i l society representatives throughout the program.

Agenda for Board Consideration
xi.

Board Members may wish to discuss, among others, the following aspects o f this CAS:

(i) Strategic focus: I s the CAS focusing on the areas where the Bank Group w i l l catalyze
the greatest return to economic growth and poverty reduction?

(ii) CAS instruments: Are the C A S lending and analytical instruments appropriate to
support the Government’s reform efforts?; and
(iii)Risk mitigation: Are the triggers and the risk mitigation framework adequate?

I1

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR FY06-09
I.Overview
1.
In the wake o f the worst economic crisis to hit the country in decades, in M a y 2004 the
Dominican population re-elected Leone1 Fernindez to the presidency with a mandate to lift the
country out o f the crisis and pave the way for renewed growth and recovery. The incoming
President, who had been in power during 1996-2000, had campaigned on a platform o f fiscal
austerity and sought to reassure the international markets his administration would take steps to
improve the climate for business generally, and foreign investment in particular.
2.
President Ferndndez’s new administration i s confronted with formidable challenges. I t s
first task i s to emerge from the crisis and restore macroeconomic stability, while reducing the
fiscal gap, restructuring debt and mobilizing new external and domestic financing. The new
administration intends to introduce reforms to place the Dominican economy o n a sound footing
and avoid the occurrence o f additional crises, primarily b y strengthening public expenditure
management procedures, enhancing regulation and supervision in the banking sector, and
restoring the financial sustainability o f the electricity sector. Increased social protection and
improved targeting o f social programs are also a priority o f the Government to avoid further
deterioration o f both living conditions and the social fabric.
3.
Looking ahead, the Dominican economy w i l l face new and large competitive pressures in
the framework o f imminent trade policy changes that w i l l make achieving and maintaining the
high growth rates of the 1990s more challenging. Increased trade liberalization-in the form o f
the phase-out o f the Multifibre Agreement in 2005, the new free trade agreement with the United
States and the forthcoming World Trade Organizations (WTO) restrictions o n Free Trade Zones
(FTZs) export support policies-will result in greater competition for Dominican producers.
Policies to improve competitiveness w i l l need to be complemented by a range o f public actions
to ensure that poor people benefit. Measures to reach the objectives o f restored growth and
increased trade and competitiveness while achieving greater social equity w i l l thus need to
complement the on-going efforts to emerge from the crisis and restore macroeconomic stability.

Implementing visible and far-reaching measures to improve governance and strengthen
institutions across all sectors must be at the core o f the Government’s efforts to address the
aforementioned challenges. While the Dominican Republic enjoyed a booming private sector in
the 1990s, state modernization was kept on the back burner, and this has created a serious
disconnect between the structure, methods, and capacities o f the public sector and the demands
o f a modern economy. The importance o f adequate and transparent legal and regulatory
frameworks has been well demonstrated b y the crises in the financial and electricity sectors.
Also, efforts to modernize the public sector b y reducing excessive centralization, reforming the
c i v i l service and improving the efficiency and accountability o f public expenditure w i l l be
critical for meeting the challenges from increased trade liberalization and resulting competitive
pressures. The dissatisfaction o f the population with the quality o f public services i s indicative
o f the urgent need to strengthen key public sector institutions.
4.

5.
Addressing these challenges w i l l require strong and sustained commitment on the part of
the FernBndez’ administration as well as coordinated support f r o m the development partners.
The World Bank Group’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY06-09 will support the
government’s program as i t faces these multiple challenges. This CAS provides an overview o f
1

the country context and recent developments and discusses key challenges; i t presents the
Government’s program for economic and social development; i t reviews progress on the current
Bank Group strategy; and identifies key areas and activities through which Bank Group support
can catalyze sustainable growth and poverty reduction in close coordination with other
development partners.
Governance and institutional strengthening are the overarching focus o f this CAS. I t has
6.
two pillars that support this focus: (i)stabilize the economy, improve competitiveness, and
restore economic growth; and (ii)
achieve greater social equity through human development and
increased coverage and quality o f basic public services.

11. The Country Context
Political Context
7.
In a vote that reflected widespread popular frustration over the worst economic crisis to h i t
the country in decades, Dominicans went to the polls in M a y 2004 and elected in the first round
Leone1 Fernindez, a former president and leader o f the opposition Dominican Liberation Party
(PLD), to replace incumbent President Hip6lito M e j i a o f the ruling Dominican Revolutionary
Party (PRD).’ While the successful transition o f leadership was widely recognized as a sign o f
the growing strength o f democracy in the country, President Fernindez’s victory emerged in a
context o f turmoil within the country’s main political parties caused by the death o f their
respective historical leaders and the subsequent power struggles for succession.2 Within the
PLD, Fernandez had emerged as the party’s leader. The PRD and the PRSC are divided among
factions pulling in different directions.
8.
The country’s political system i s characterized by a highly centralized presidential regime
with limited checks and balances and weak institutions that leave room for the abuse o f power.
The culture o f patronage has profoundly shaped Dominican public institutions and administrative
practices. As a result, c i v i l service practices favor clientelism over professional qualifications
and have resulted in an inefficient public administration, high turnover in most public sector jobs
and limited institutional continuity.

9.
The public administration i s highly centralized; opaque accounting and public expenditure
practices and state capture b y vested interests characterize public sector management. In
particular, the use o f public contracts to reward political allies and financial contributors has
resulted in inefficient public resource use and corruption. The general public has come to expect
that the role o f government i s to provide favors or rewards rather than to deliver public services
in accordance with objective rules and standards. This clientelist system o f governance has
become incompatible with the changing structure o f the Dominican economy and the challenges
i t faces within the context o f an increasingly competitive global environment. The redefinition
of the role and functions o f Government i s inextricably linked to a transformation o f the political
system with stronger checks and balances between the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial
branches.

’

President Fernandez o f P L D obtained 57 percent o f the valid votes, Hip6lito Mejia o f PRD obtained 34 percent,
and a third candidate o f Balaguer’s Partido de l a R e v o l u c i h Social Cristiano (PRSC) obtained approximately 9
percent.
Messrs. Juan Bosch, P L D (died in 2001); Francisco Peiia Gbmez, PRD (died in 1998); and Joaquin Balaguer,
PRSC (died in 2002).

2

10. The effort to improve governance and modernize the state w i l l require implementing
complex institutional reforms. The ability o f President Fernindez’ administration to implement
these reforms i s conditioned by:
0

0

The minority status o f i t s party in Congress. In the Senate, President Fernindez’s PLD
holds only one seat; in the Chamber of Deputies, i t holds 41 seats out o f 150. This makes
approval o f sensitive reforms politically challenging.
The need to increase support in the provinces in view o f the 2006 Congressional elections
may affect the Government’s appetite for bold reforms impacting specific interest groups.

President Fernindez’s electoral victory reflects popular support for measures to stabilize
the economy and restore growth. Showing rapid improvements in the living conditions o f the
population-including
those o f the poorest and the newly poor-and building civil society’s
broad ownership for reforms w i l l be critical to solidify that support.
11.

Economic Context
12. After a decade o f rapid economic growth in the 1990s (5.9 percent on average), driven b y
strong export growth linked to preferential access to the U S market and the booming tourism
sector, the Dominican economy experienced slower growth in 2001-2002 (see Table l),
followed
b y a massive banking crisis in 2003 that was triggered by the failure o f the third largest
commercial bank (Baninter) amid fraudulent banking practices and inadequate banking
supervision. The banking crisis, which soon extended to two other medium-size banks
(BancrCdito and Banco Mercantil), led to increasing macro imbalances and a sharp decline in
market sentiment. Because this crisis was caused in part b y failures o f the private sector, the
latter has suffered a considerable loss o f confidence among potential investors. T o shore up
confidence in the banking system, the Central Bank intervened at a cost equivalent to 21 percent
o f GDP, raising the quasi-fiscal deficit sharply, and contributing to a doubling of total public
debt and a tripling o f domestic debt between 2002 and 2003. Banking system deposits
stabilized, but only after both base money and public debt had expanded significantly.

13. Macroeconomic policy. The macroeconomic crisis was characterized b y a massive (100
percent) depreciation o f the peso from March 2003 to January 2004 and high inflation (from 5
percent annual average in 2002 to 27 percent in 2003 and 52 percent in 2004).3 The currency
depreciation pushed up domestic fuel prices on top o f record increases in world o i l prices that
worsened the financial predicament o f the electricity sector and contributed to a significant
valuation increase o f the external public debt to GDP ratio from 21.5 percent o f GDP in 2002 to
36.6 percent in 2003 and 33.5 percent in 2004. The fiscal deficit (central government) doubled
in 2003, reaching 4.5 percent o f GDP (with a primary balance o f -2.6 percent o f GDP). As a
result o f the bank bailouts, the quasi-fiscal deficit o f the Central Bank jumped from 0.3 percent
o f GDP in 2002 to 2.6 percent in 2003, and i s estimated to have reached 4.0 percent o f GDP in
2004. Public sector domestic debt increased f r o m 5 percent o f GDP at end-2002 to nearly 18
percent o f GDP b y end-December 2003 and close to 19 percent in 2004. The macroeconomic
crisis i s also reflected in the slowdown in economic growth: GDP growth was a stagnant -0.4
percent in 2003 but rebounded to 2 percent in 2004. Exports recovered in 2003 due to the
depreciation, while imports were relatively compressed and consumption fell sharply,
particularly private consumption. Table 1 contains a summary o f recent macroeconomic
developments as well as projections covering the CAS period. The tourism sector has remained

Monthly inflation figures, however, have come down remarkably; end of period inflation for 2004 was below 30
percent, and recent estimates for 2005 are single digit.

3

strong throughout the economic crisis, with tourist arrivals up in 2003 and 2004 compared to
earlier years hard hit b y a tourist slump in the wake of September 11.
Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators

Primary Balance (Central

14. T o address the macroeconomic crisis, the authorities designed a program that was
supported b y a 24-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) for US$620 million, approved b y the
IMF’s Board in August 2003. The program aimed to strengthen the banking system through a
number o f reforms, stabilize public debt through fiscal adjustment, and relieve pressure on the
currency b y limiting monetary expansion. The first disbursement o f the program (US$120
million) was made in early September 2003.

15. In late 2003 and the first part of 2004, the macro stabilization program suffered major
slippages in policy implementation, including the Government’s unexpected buy-out in midSeptember 2003 o f the private investor’s share (50 percent) in two of the country’s main three
energy distribution companies, Edenorte and Edesur, generating an additional US$488 million in
new public sector debt. The delayed first review of the SBA was completed in February 2004

4

and resulted in the disbursement o f a second tranche (US$62 million). While the banking crisis
was contained by early 2004,4 macroeconomic policies went off track soon thereafter. Slippages
in fiscal and monetary policies, and growing questions about the government’s political w i l l to
implement corrective actions undermined market confidence and set o f f further depreciation and
inflation. External arrears emerged; and net international reserves-historically l o w - d e c l i n e d
further.
16. In the aftermath o f the M a y 2004 elections, some market confidence returned as a result o f
the perceived strong commitment o f President Fernandez’ administration to stabilize the
economy and restore growth. The new administration started negotiations with the IMF for a
new SBA including a macro stabilization program with revenue and expenditure measures to
reduce the fiscal gap. As a first step, a tax reform package was prepared in consultation w i t h the
IMF and passed by Congress in October 2004; this i s expected to yield more than 2 percent o f
GDP in 2005. Since July 2004, the peso has appreciated from RD$45/US$1 to less than
RD$30/US$1 in November 2004 and has since then remained stable between RD$28 and RD$30
to the US$. Inflation has come down significantly and spreads on external bonds have fallen in
recent months. The authorities recently obtained financing assurances from the Paris Club for
rescheduling pre-cut o f f date obligations falling due in 2004, with an envisaged cash f l o w relief
o f US$177 million pending an agreement o f comparable treatment by private creditors.
Although the authorities missed the October lSt
deadline to achieve comparable treatment, the
Paris Club has expressed a willingness to extend the deadline and apply the comparability
criteria to 2005-2006 private debt obligations. The Government i s currently pursuing a marketfriendly restructuring o f private debt that i s well advanced in designing a voluntary bond
exchange that would restructure outstanding external securities and expects the exchange
operation to be launched in the first quarter o f 2005. Also, the Central Bank has managed to
stabilize base money, and interest rates have declined.
17. The authorities’ macroeconomic stabilization program i s being supported b y a new, 28month SBA in the amount of US$643 million, approved by the IMF Board on January 31, 2005.
This program aims at consolidating the recent progress in economic policies b y the new
government and envisages a series o f actions on the structural front to address economic
governance and transparency weaknesses. The stabilization program consists o f the following
key policy measures: (i)
fiscal adjustment that restores fiscal balance and reduces the debt
burden; (ii)
debt-rescheduling, bond restructuring and other financial strategies to ease the public
sector’s short-term liquidity problems and ensure that borrowing remains at sustainable levels for
the medium term; (iii)
measures to strengthen the banking system and financial regulation and
supervision, including measures to ensure better implementation o f monetary policy and
effective management o f the financial system’s stability by the Central Bank; and (iv) reform o f
public sector financial institutions, to improve the design and execution o f fiscal policies.

18. O n top o f the revenue measures adopted in 2004, the authorities have adopted expenditure
measures including a 10 percent reduction in the number o f central government employees,
streamlining o f liquidified gas consumption subsidies, and a rationalization o f the public
investment program for 2005. Finally, the authorities have recently issued two decrees to
strengthen expenditure control and monitoring procedures and, to further improve financial

Several branches of Baninter as well as i t s credit card business were acquired by the Nova Scotia Bank. BancrCdito
was sold to a domestic industrial group, Grupo Ledn (the owner o f Banco Profesional). The Central Bank took over
part o f related party portfolio of Banco Mercantil, and the Republic Bank o f Trinidad and Tobago acquired the rest.

5

management transparency and accountability, have submitted to Congress four laws concerning
public procurement, treasury, internal controls and public debt.
19. The Financial Sector. Although the banking system i s currently in a stable situation
(deposits and credits have been increasing since 2003 despite the crisis), banking sector issues
remain a concern. Internationally assisted inspections of banks, finalized and presented to the
authorities in spring 2004, did not identify new cases o f bank fraud. However, an important
capital gap was identified in terms o f local standards, even higher in terms o f international
standards, reflecting a worsening loan portfolio and lack o f loan loss provisions. The authorities
have taken action to address some o f these weaknesses. A monetary and financial law (LMF,
L a w No. 183-02) was approved in 2002 and efforts to improve the banking regulation and
supervisory function are ongoing in the framework o f the IMF SBA, with the intent to bring
banking regulation and supervision closer to international standards and practices. The financial
authorities have initiated some urgent reforms in the sector but the necessary medium-term
reforms are s t i l l pending.
20. The Electricity Sector. The electricity sector continues to be affected b y a major crisis, as
rolling blackouts disrupt electricity service to domestic, industrial and commercial consumers.
The sector has a consolidated debt o f over US$500 million and was losing about US$40 million
per month in late-2004.5 The peso depreciation and the high petroleum prices brought the sector
to financial collapse. At the root o f the problem, however, i s the inability o f the sector to
generate adequate financial resources due to large distribution losses and l o w bill collection
rates. The sector i s characterized b y a vicious circle o f a consumer culture o f non-payment,
inadequate cash flow, debt escalation, poor reliability o f power supply, and consumer
dissatisfaction. Improving the financial sustainability o f the electricity sector w i l l be critical for
both restoring macroeconomic stability and resuming economic growth. Recent steps in this
regard include efforts to: (i)
improve the loss reduction program; (ii)
accelerate the program to
increase bill collection; (iii)
retarget subsidies for households (now benefiting more than 89
percent o f connected households); (iv) control distribution companies’ operating costs; and (v)
better manage the rationing o f power supply. However, even with these measures, whose
implementation w i l l require strong and sustained Government commitment, the resulting power
sector deficit i s expected to remain significant, potentially as high as $25 to $30 m i l l i o n per
month, implying the need for strong measures during the next couple o f years to achieve a more
sustainable deficit level.
21. Trade and Competitiveness. Looking ahead, the Dominican economy will face significant
new competitive pressures in the context o f imminent trade policy changes that w i l l make
achieving and maintaining the high growth rates o f the 1990s more challenging. Increased trade
liberalization w i l l occur progressively in conjunction with the phase-out o f the Multifibre
Agreement (since January 2005), the new free trade agreement with the U S (DR-CAFTA) and
the forthcoming W T O requirement to adjust the free trade zone (FTZ) tax regime to eliminate
effective export subsidies b y 2010. The Multifibre Agreement phase-out may result in a major
contraction in FTZ apparel exports, although the D R - C A F T A i s expected to cushion the impact
b y stimulating trade, investment and employment. The fiscal impact o f D R - C A F T A may be
particularly challenging, however, with fiscal revenues potentially falling significantly. In the
case o f the agriculture sector, the impact o f trade liberalization under DR-CAFTA w i l l be mainly
on the fiscal side, with revenues on agriculture imports expected to decline by 5 percent in the

This i s down from US$50 million per month in July and August 2004, but nonetheless requiring massive transfers
from the Government to keep the lights on.

6

short run, and by 12 percent in 15 years. On the other hand, D R - C A F T A w i l l likely have a
limited short-term impact on agricultural trade volumes and prices, given that Dominican
agriculture exports already have preferential access to the United States. Price distortions
created b y high import tariffs to selected crops, such as rice, w i l l decrease in the medium and
long term, although they w i l l not disappear. But the new incentive structure w i l l likely induce a
shift from rice cultivation to higher value-added products in the medium term, such as tropical
fruits.
The mining sector could potentially also contribute to economic growth and
diversification o f Dominican exports. So far, however, the development o f this sector has been
constrained b y issues o f transparency, poor governance, and harmful environmental practices.
22. Environment and Tourism. In order to maintain competitiveness in the tourism sector,
additional efforts to improve environmental management will be essential as emphasized in the
Bank’s Country Environment Assessment (FY04). The main environmental issues relate to
water management (water quality, water scarcity and water resources management), solid waste
collection and disposal. Most water quality problems are generated by the lack o f adequate
urban wastewater collection, treatment and disposal, and agricultural run-off causing quality
problems downstream and in coastal waters (including beaches frequented by tourists).
Inadequate management o f water demand (mainly in agriculture) and high unaccounted for water
consumption in urban areas generate water scarcity. The newer tourism developments are
situated in zones where water i s generally scarce and the urban sprawl accompanying these
developments creates additional demands on aquifers. At a minimum, tourism and urban
planning as well as incentives and encouragements to save water will be needed to ensure
sustainability o f these tourism developments. Solid waste management (collection and disposal)
would make i t more attractive for tourists to travel in the country and would vastly improve the
health o f populations living close to landfills and the quality o f the environment. Environmental
management i s also critical for suppression o f pest species (e.g., mosquitos which carry malaria
and Dengue fever). The adequate management o f the protected areas in association with c i v i l
society and the private sector would help to diversify the country’s tourism brand and allow local
communities to benefit more from the sector. In addition, strengthening capacity for disaster
preparedness and response would mitigate the negative impacts o f natural hazards, particularly in
the tourism and agricultural sectors.
23. Scenarios for Future Growth. The new external environment brings new opportunities as
well as challenges and sustained implementation o f the Government’s program to stabilize macro
imbalances w i l l lay the groundwork for restoring growth. Under the base case macroeconomic
scenario, real GDP growth i s expected to reach 2.5 percent in 2005 and return to more robust
levels thereafter, averaging around 4 and 4.5 percent (see Table 1 above). Annual average
inflation would fall to 8 percent in 2005, spike up slightly in 2006 in conjunction with
anticipated fiscal reforms, and then fall thereafter to 6 percent or lower. Subject to
implementation o f the planned fiscal measures, the central government deficit would decline to
, less than 1 percent in 2005 and turn to surplus in 2006 and beyond. The current account
balance-which was nearly 6 percent o f GDP in 2004-is expected to decline to 2 percent of
GDP in 2005 and to nearly zero in 2006 as a result o f a pick-up in imports. Even with the
envisaged fiscal adjustment, the base case scenario s t i l l generates a financing gap in 2005 and
2006 due to debt-servicing obligations; this i s expected to be filled through a combination of
Paris Club and private debt rescheduling as well as budget support f r o m multilaterals.
24. The return of confidence in the economy and implementation o f DR-CAFTA could bring
even higher payoffs, particularly if the Government addresses the major institutional and
regulatory weaknesses that contributed to declining competitiveness and economic recession in
the past. Under such a high case scenario, real GDP growth would average 6 percent in the

7

medium run-returning to i t s historical average for the 1990s. A return o f investor confidence
would raise foreign and domestic investment and at the same time facilitate access to financing
on better terms in the international markets. Moreover, successful implementation o f the IMFsupported program together with strengthened governance would enable the Government to
respond more effectively to external shocks such as natural disasters or o i l price increases.
25. The main challenges for the Government to increase competitiveness, in addition to
maintaining sound macroeconomic management and strengthening the financial and electricity
sectors, w i l l be to: (i)
increase backward linkages between FTZs and the domestic economy;6
(ii)
reduce and, when possible, eliminate subsidies to non-competitive agricultural products and
provide more public goods and services (research, extension, sanitary measures) enhancing the
competitiveness o f the agricultural sector; (iii)
improve trade facilitation, particularly through
customs reform; (iv) improve the investment climate (beyond simply restoring macro stability),
especially for small and medium-size firms, e.g., b y reducing the costs associated w i t h business
start-up; (v) foster continuous technological innovation to retain competitiveness and expand
market niches; and (vi) promote complementary education efforts to increase labor productivity
and skill relevance. Dominican trade and competitiveness are also hampered b y inefficient port
infrastructure and equipment, poor operational management and important institutional
shortcomings. Together with pervasive discretion and long delays in customs, these result in
greatly increased inventory costs. In order to improve competitiveness in the tourism sector,
additional efforts to improve environmental management w i l l be essential, particularly in the
areas o f wastewater and solid waste collection and disposal.
26. If the Dominican authorities do not respond to these challenges with effective policies for
economic management and adequate progress on reform, then the anticipated pay-off to trade
liberalization w i l l not materialize. Under the resulting low case scenario, real GDP growth
would not exceed 3 percent, and per capita incomes would stagnate. As a result, the longstanding social challenges and persistent (and increasing) poverty levels would likely continue
and be exacerbated.

Poverty Trends and Social Issues
27. Poverty rates are currently at 31% in urban areas and 45% in rural areas. Poverty rates are
higher among households headed by females and elderly people, and take their heaviest toll on
children and youth through increased rates o f malnutrition, school dropouts, youth
unemployment and risky behavior. Social indicators in the Dominican Republic remain below
the L A C region’s average and that o f countries with similar income per capita (see Annex A2).
According to the 2004 UNDP Human Development Index the country ranks 98 among 177
countries.
28. The country’s impressive economic growth during the 1990s lifted about 5 percent of
Dominicans out of poverty (2 percent out o f extreme poverty).’ Persistent disparities in the
distribution o f human, physical and financial assets and inefficiency and inequity in public

Over the past two decades, the contribution of FTZs to export growth has been important, but limited backward
linkages to the domestic economy resulting from FTZ trade incentives have restricted the sector’s contribution to
overall growth.
Poverty reduction was also induced by the creation of new jobs particularly in the Small and Medium Enterprise
(SMEs) sector. I n 2002, approximately 1.6 million people worked for SMEs with less than 20 employees. This
represents 47 percent of total employment for the Dominican Republic, and 66 percent o f non-agricultural jobs
created by the private sector.

8

spending prevented a faster decline in poverty.' In particular, large segments o f the rural
population have not participated in the benefits o f growth, and inequality remains at the average
level o f the LAC region, already the highest in the world. Preliminary results from a recent
living conditions survey indicate that about 36% o f the population had incomes insufficient t o
cover their basic needs in 2004, and over 13% could not even afford minimum food
requirements. This indicates that while economic growth i s critical to reduce poverty in the
Dominican Republic, i t has to be complemented b y a range o f public actions to ensure that poor
people benefit including the most vulnerable among the poor.
29. Preliminary assessments o f the impact o f the recent crisis on the poor indicate a dramatic
increase in the percentage o f people living in poverty and a general worsening o f living
conditions across income groups.' About 15 percent o f Dominicans (about 1.3 million) fell into
poverty during 2000-2004 and close to 7% (over half a million) became unable to afford even the
basic food needs." Average real labor earnings fell by almost one third and open unemployment
worsened b y one percentage point from early 2002 to early 2004.
30. A qualitative study completed in December 2004 on the social dimensions o f the economic
crisis revealed that some poor households responded to the decline in real incomes b y removing
their children from school, reducing food consumption, and eliminating services (phone, gas and
electricity)." Years o f slow, albeit important, reduction o f poverty rates and improved living
standards were reversed, all of which weaken the country's capacity to meet the MDGs b y 2015,
particularly those related to the eradication o f hunger, improvement o f child and maternal health,
and environmental sustainability.
31. Entrenched pockets o f poverty persist on the Haitian border and in the bateyes, the old
sugar plantations. There are 230 bateyes in the country, home to about 31,000 families or
250,000 people (see B o x 1). L i f e in the bateyes has always been hard, but recently, with the
privatization and/or mechanization o f the plantations, services that used to be provided b y the
State Sugar Corporation have gone f r o m bad to worse.
32. Furthermore, a large percentage o f families in the Dominican Republic are legally
ineligible to benefit from social services because they lack official documentation. l2
Undocumented families are almost exclusively poor, o f both Dominican and Haitian origin.
Taken together, the current situation in the social sectors results in grave errors of inclusion and
exclusion, waste o f scarce public resources, and significant losses in human capital formation.
Inequitable access to schooling affects the long-term prospects for raising labor quality and
productivity, confining Dominican labor force to basic s k i l l s which cannot meet the demands o f
skill-intensive new technologies, notably in higher value-added activities, limiting future
competitiveness and economic growth.

The implied elasticity of poverty reduction to growth in the 1990s was low compared to other countries o f similar
per capita due to initial inequality.
The bulk of the increase in poverty occurred during 2002-04 since poverty remained stagnant during 2000-02. The
increase i n poverty i s similar to that observed i n Argentina during the severe crisis of 2000-2002.
Results are from an on-going analysis o f the Labor Force Surveys 1998-2004 and a 2004 living conditions survey
(ENCOVI), which will be finalized in the 2005 poverty assessment
I' Informe Final de Investigacibn "Dimensions Sociales de la Crisis Economica y Financiera en l a Republica
Dominicana," INTEC, December 2004.
I t i s estimated that approximately 30 percent o f extremely poor households (and 50 percent of extremely poor
children) lack the documentation they require to be enrolled in social programs.

9

BOX 1: LIFE IN THE BATEYES
Fifty-four percent o f the population i s less than 15 years old.
Fifteen percent o f households with children age 0 to 5 years old are headed by women.
Sixty-three percent of total residents are of Dominican origin (although many are o f Haitian descent).
Thirty-two percent are undocumented. Income per capita i s particularly low (in 2001: estimated i n less
than US$36 per month), which indicates that virtually all residents o f the bateyes live below the poverty
line (US$60) or i n a situation o f extreme poverty.
Thirty-four percent o f residents are illiterate, with major implications on their working status. In 2001,
more than 43 percent o f the residents were unemployed; this number may have increased due to the
crisis. Those who work are mainly employed i n agriculture, construction, the free trade zones, and
domestic work. Women are more likely to be unemployed than men (38 percent vs. 11 percent), or
working in under-paid domestic work or informal trade.
Ninety-eight percent of the residents live permanently in the bateyes, usually in precarious dwellings
built with low quality, and in some times, hazardous materials, such as asbestos.
Access to water and sanitation services i s limited: 8 percent o f the families have direct access to water i n
their houses and 30 per cent have private latrines; the rest have little or no access to water and sanitation
services. Less than 1 percent o f the families have direct access to solid waste services.
Health standards are poor, as confirmed by the high incidence o f respiratory diseases i n children age 0 to
5 years old (33 percent) and diarrhea (29 percent).
HIV-AIDS incidence rates are five times above the national average; 92 percent of resident women have
never used a condom.

Source: A. Tejada, 2001, Bateyes del Estado, USAID

33. Part o f the problem stems from l o w transparency and efficiency in public spending on the
social sectors, as well as l o w levels o f public spending for these sectors, on average about onehalf o f LAC averages (as a percentage o f GDP) for education and health, coupled with a
proliferation o f social programs and l o w transparency and efficiency in the use of this financing.
The Social Cabinet completed a survey o f over 125 social programs which were found to be,
duplicative, untargeted and even contradictory. As a result, many ineffective social programs
were consolidated or eliminated with the support of the Bank-financed Social Crisis Response
Adjustment Loan (SCRAL). In addition, provision o f social services i s over-centralized and
service providers are not accountable. For instance, the health sector pays medical personnel
whether they show up for work or not, and considerable public expenditures on items such as
essential medicines and medical equipment do not seem to result in improved access to these
goods by those in need. Notwithstanding the importance of the public sector in health care
provision in the DR, private hospitals and other facilities play a critical role in the healthcare
provision in the Dominican Republic. I t i s estimated that out o f a total 5.5 hospital beds per
1,000 inhabitants in the country, close to 3.9 are provided by the private sector.13

34. The most important impact o f the crisis came f r o m high inflation. Food, medicine and
transport prices became prohibitive for large segments o f the population, and the reduction in
fiscal revenues and in public investment has continued to affect the provision o f basic social
services and social programs. In addition, the electricity sector crisis had serious social
repercussions, with electricity blackouts resulting in increased crime and violence and
jeopardizing basic hospital procedures. The earthquake, floods and hurricanes that hit the
country in 2003 and 2004 and the lack o f watershed management compounded the already
serious social situation.

35. The combination o f these factors has had a particularly detrimental impact on the ability of
poor households to invest in the most basic levels o f human capital development: health,

l3National

Health Statistics, SESPAS; PAHO, 1999-2000.

10

nutrition and education. Given that these households typically have greater numbers o f
~ h i l d r e n , ’ ~the impact o f the crisis has been especially hard on children and the youth.
Furthermore, because national surveys are unable to capture many o f the most vulnerable
populations-those living on the border and the undocumented-social indicators may in fact be
worse than indicated b y the surveys.
36. The impact o f the recent crisis on youth (ages 15-24) i s a growing concern in Dominican
society. The increase in unemployment and the continued weakness o f the secondary education
system in meeting demand has left greater numbers o f young people out o f school and out o f
work. As demonstrated elsewhere in the Caribbean, this i s a key factor leading to increases in
crime, violence, gangs and other forms o f risky behavior (e.g., unsafe sex) particularly among
the poorest segments o f this age group, which see few prospects for the future.
37. The economic cost o f crime i s high. Regional studies indicate that, in addition to the public
and private costs (increased police, security and criminal justice, and spending in health services)
higher levels o f crime generate high intangible costs, as measured by lower productivity levels,
fewer incentives to invest, especially close to unsafe areas, and lower consumption and quality o f
life. Once developed, crime tends to gain strength over time, despite possible improvements in
the economic environment. Crime in the Dominican Republic also impacts on tourism, a major
source o f employment, foreign exchange, and economic growth.
38. Remittances, estimated at US$2.7 billion in 2004, represent an important safety net for the
Dominican p00r.l~ Efforts to increase remittance flows and harness them for economic and
social development through actions to reduce transaction fees are being explored. Developing
regulations related to efficiency, transparency and risks o f remittance payment circuits, and
leveraging them for local community and small enterprise development w i l l also be important.
39. In 2003, the government launched a Poverty Reduction Strategy for the period 2003-2015,
which provides the country with a medium-term plan to meet the MDGs. The preparation o f the
strategy was led b y the National Planning Institute (ONAPLAN) and the then Social Cabinet and
involved extensive consultation. The Plan proposes a series o f programs in three broad
categories: (i)social protection, focused on the poorest identified through clear targeting
mechanisms; (ii)
social welfare, aimed at providing a minimum level o f public services to all
citizens; and (iii)
poverty reduction, to meet the challenges o f unequal distribution o f wealth and
access to economic opportunities for poor people. While the plan’s medium to long-term
be adapted to the new fiscal
objectives are realistic, implementation o f the strategy needs to: (i)
situation and fully incorporate the implications o f the country’s new trade environment
(particularly the trade agreement with the United States); (ii)
address short-term actions to help
mitigate the impact o f the crisis on the poor and vulnerable including targeting and efficiency o f
social expenditure; and (iii)improve economic opportunities for the poor through the
development o f micro-enterprises, small and medium enterprises, and labor market
improvements. The new administration i s currently engaged in an effort to update the strategy
and to cost the proposed actions.

l4I n the Dominican Republic, adolescent pregnancy i s a particular concern, with fertility rates of women aged 15-19
among the highest in the LAC Region (94 per 1000 in 2002), and considerably higher among the poor.
j 5 Remittances in 2003 were more than twice as high as foreign direct investment (US$2.3 billion compared to
US$l.O billion).

11

Governance and Institutional Development
40. The modernization o f the State and the improvement o f governance, including corporate
governance, remain at the core o f the development agenda for the Dominican Republic. The
importance o f adequate and transparent legal and regulatory frameworks has been well
demonstrated by the crises in the financial and electricity sectors. One o f the main challenges for
the country i s precisely to put in place the legal and institutional capacity to realize the full
benefits o f private participation and competition. In particular, the country needs to develop a
With the exception o f
transparent, independent and competent regulatory capacity.
telecommunications, regulatory capacity in the Dominican Republic i s s t i l l in i t s nascent form,
and the concept o f independent regulation i s not widely accepted or understood. As the banking
sector crisis demonstrated, there i s also the need to improve the standards o f governance for
private corporations, b y fostering accountability and transparency, and promoting fairness.
41. Doing business - International comparison ranks the Dominican Republic below average
both worldwide and within the L A C region, with respect to Government effectiveness, rule o f
law and control o f corruption. The Dominican Republic also ranks poorly in terms o f business
entry regulations and contract enforcement. In order to remain competitive and to attract new
investment, improvements in the institutional and regulatory environment are required. Puerto
Rico and China are likely to compete in similar markets (see Table 2). I f these issues are not
addressed, the Dominican Republic could experience considerable losses in terms o f firms exit,
j o b destruction (especially among the youth), and declining government revenue. Textile and
apparel-related employment (up to 190,000 jobs) are especially at risk, having significant
poverty implications.
Table 2: Doing Business: A Weak Judiciary i s Expensive

Days to start business
Cost (% income P.c.)
Days
Cost (% income P.c.)

78

6

14

41

48

3

53

15

495

360

39 1

41

44

21

40

32

42. Additionally, the Dominican State s t i l l faces a formidable agenda in i t s efforts to leave
behind excessive centralization, reform the c i v i l service, and improve the efficiency,
transparency and accountability of public spending. Recent events (high-profile corruption cases
and the banking crisis) have highlighted the impact o f corruption and capture o f the State b y
vested interests. In Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) 2004
published in October 2004, the Dominican Republic scored 2.9; a score below 3.0 i s considered
evidence o f “rampant corruption.”’6 Similarly, the Dominican Republic scores below Latin
America and Caribbean regional averages on all WBI governance indicators (see Figure 1
below). Widespread allegations o f corruption have eroded trust in Government and the Office o f
the President. In a survey carried out in the first half o f 2004, the Office o f the President had the

l6
The index ranks countries in order o f perceived corruption, which i t defines as “the use o f public office for private
benefit.” The survey covered 146 countries, o f which 24 are in L A C among which the Dominican Republic was
rated number 10 from the bottom (Transparency International 2004; Oxford Analytica, October 22, 2004).

12

lowest credibility o f all institutions in the country, followed by Congress and the P01ice.l~
President Fernindez i s aware o f the link between corruption and lack o f credibility at home and
aboard and appointed a high-level ethics and anti-conuption commission staffed b y government,
private sector and c i v i l society representatives known for their commitment in this regard. The
commission i s charged with the development o f an anti-corruption plan o f action, and President
Fernindez has requested U SAID and World Bank support.
Figure 1: Governance Indicators
Dominican Republic (2002)
Voice and Accountability
Political Stability
Government Effectiveness
Regulatory Quality
Rule of Law
Control of Corruption

0

25

75

50

100

%

-

I
Source

-

_ _-

.

E3 Regional Average (LAC)

-_ _

Dominican Republic

D Kaufmann A Kragy and M Mastrum 2003 Governance MdtterS I11 Governance Indicators for 1996-2002

(http www worldbdnk org/wbdgovernance/pubs/govmatters html)

Despite some recent progress toward modernizing the public sector, the structure, methods
and capacities o f the Dominican public institutions and their interface with the citizenry s t i l l f a l l
far short o f the minimal requirements for effective and efficient policy making, regulation,
programming and use o f public resources, and service delivery. The principal challenge i s t o
break with the tradition o f centralized but often arbitrary controls that are based on exchanges o f
favors with external and internal clients and to adopt a transparent, rule-based system focused on
citizen demand for
maximizing the public good. Progress w i l l be difficult given that: (i)
the clientelistic logic behind the
institutional change i s neither strong nor very focused; (ii)
acquisition and use o f public office and resources remains in force; and (iii)the new
administration faces an opposition party well represented both in Congress and in the
municipalities.
43.

44. Moreover, a much more strategic and integrated approach i s needed to public financial
management and procurement. A joint Bank and IDB Country Fiduciary Assessment" was
performed in early 2004 which evaluated the fiduciary arrangements o f the central government.
The assessment found these arrangements (which include procurement, budgeting, accounting,
debt management, audit and internal control functions) to be weak and limiting the capacity o f
the government to effectively and efficiently program public expenditure or properly account for
their use. During a workshop in November 2004 that discussed the recommendations o f the
assessment, government working groups developed action plans to remedy these weaknesses.
These action plans align the report's assessment with ongoing reform efforts and propose short,

" The survey La IV Encuesta Nacional de Cultura, Politica y Democracia (Santo Domingo, DEMOS 2004) was
carried out between January 20 and March 3,2004.
l8The DR Fiduciary Assessment includes a summary o f the 2003 Public Expenditure Review (PER), the Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and the updated Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR).

13

medium, and long-term measures. The Government has committed to preparing a strategy for
the implementation o f the plans.
45. Some ongoing donor assisted programs (notably IDB and EU financed) support critical
reforms in the area o f public sector modernization that touch on public financial management
and procurement. However, results to date are limited and could easily be reversed or
undermined. The new administration’s l i s t o f governance priorities i s extensive. Nevertheless,
in i t s view, the most urgent priorities are in ensuring firm adherence to the rule o f law, and in the
core areas o f financial (including budgeting, control, procurement, and public debt) and human
resource management, and in strengthening the regulatory framework for the financial and
electricity sectors. This agenda hardly exhausts the necessary reforms but would constitute an
important step toward restoring fiscal discipline, rationalizing public resource use, increasing
transparency, discouraging corruption, and improving public service delivery. Proposed reforms
in the other branches and levels of Government w i l l necessarily take more time because their
political implications complicate reaching consensus on their design (e.g., the electoral system,
Congress, and decentralization) or, in the case of the judiciary, because the institution i s s t i l l
adjusting to the structural changes recently implemented.

111. The Government’s Program
46. The PLD presented i t s Plan for the period o f 2004-2008 during the electoral campaign.
The program i s broad and ambitious; nevertheless, i t clearly sets out four priority themes or focal
areas. Since taking power, the Government has updated this plan and i s currently defining i t s
policies in these four areas:

Theme 1: Restore Macroeconomic Stability to Reengage in Growth. This theme i s
sometimes referred to as “modernization o f the economy.” I t emphasizes four key aspects:
economic policy, fiscal policy, public debt management, and public expenditure

management.

Theme 2:
Consolidate Democratic Governance by Strengthening Key Public
Institutions. This theme, sometimes referred to as “more and better democracy,” identifies
reforms in six key areas: Political Reform, Reform of the Public Administration, Reform of
the Executive Power, Reform of the Legislative Power, Reform of the Judiciary, and
Municipal Reform. The Government program emphasizes the importance o f strengthening
public institutions and making processes more transparent including the procurement and
financial management systems.
Theme 3: Engender a greater level of social and territorial cohesion in Dominican
society. This theme focuses primarily on social policies but includes also environmental
policies and land-use planning. The Government proposes to halt the increase in poverty
and the deterioration in human development conditions o f the people; promote policies to
reduce the levels o f inequality in the distribution o f wealth; ensure efficiency and targeting
in social public expenditures; promote gender equality; and pursue physical planning
policies that are environmentally sustainable.
Theme 4: Improve the competitiveness of the Dominican economy. This area i s
sometimes referred to as “national and international convergence.” I t emphasizes three
critical policy areas: International Trade, Free Trade Zones, and Tourism within a
framework of environmental sustainability.

14

47. Within this overall program, the Government has given priority to restoring
macroeconomic stability through tax reform, expenditure cuts, improved expenditure control,
debt restructuring, recapitalization of banks, strengthened institutional capacity o f the monetary
authorities to improve the design and implementation o f monetary policies, and stronger
financial sector oversight and regulation. Also as a priority, the government intends to reduce
the electricity sector deficit through various measures. I t intends to implement measures to
restore growth and increase trade and competitiveness. Restoring sound macroeconomic
management and strengthening the financial and electricity sectors w i l l be pre-requisites in this
respect.

Additionally, the Fernindez administration has launched an ambitious social agenda, which
builds on reforms supported b y the IDB and World Bank’s social sector loans. This agenda
includes improved targeting o f social programs through the use o f an updated Poverty M a p
(based on the 2002 census and relying on unsatisfied basic needs) and household-level surveys,
enabling the development o f a unified system for beneficiary selection. I t also includes the
expansion o f conditional cash transfer programs, “Comer es Primero” for those living in
extreme poverty,” and the “Tarjeta de Asistencia Escolar” for poor families who send their
children to primary school. Recognizing that the crisis has set back progress on many o f the
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) indicators, President Fernindez has established a Social
Cabinet to spearhead social sector reforms and set up a Presidential Commission for the
Achievement o f the MDGs and Sustainable Development. A key task o f the Commission i s to
catalyze the incorporation o f the MDGs in all government programs as well as to monitor
progress.
48.

IV. Progress on the Current Bank G r o u p Strategy
The last full CAS, which dates back to 1999, focused on: (i)
sustaining economic growth;
(ii)
increasing the access o f poor people to the benefit o f growth; (iii)
modernizing the state and

49.

improving governance; and (iv) implementing policies for rural and environmentally sustainable
development. Up until the inception o f the 2003 crisis, Government advanced in several o f these
areas. Progress on the larger reforms, however, was limited. Limited advances were also made
in modernizing the State and improving governance, especially putting in place appropriate legal
and regulatory frameworks and the institutional capacity required to promote private sector
competition. During the 1999 CAS period, the Bank approved U S 1 1 8 million o f new
commitments.*’ Considerable progress was made in project implementation; and, prior to the
2003 banking and electricity crisis, the overall macro performance was broadly positive (See
Annex A3).
50. A 2003 OED Country Assistance Evaluation for the period 1985-2002 concluded that the
Bank’s involvement and effectiveness have varied, ranging f r o m intensive and effective in the
early 1990s to limited in mid-1990s and finally to more active involvement with increasing
effectiveness recently. The OED recommended that the Bank: (i)
continue to improve the

l 9 Comer es Primero (Eating Comes First), originally limited to 6,000 families, w i l l be extended to 250,000 in the
next years. I t implies the distribution o f debit cards with a balance o f RD$500 (about US$16) per month available to
poor families under the SIUBEN. The plan i s that the card will allow beneficiaries to purchase groceries at
participating neighborhood grocery shops, and also to buy propane gas at subsidized prices, as well as receive funds
available to assist poor parents with children i n public schools, and other social assistance programs.
The 1999 CAS base case scenario included ten projects out o f which three sizeable operations were not delivered
because of inadequate progress in the energy sector, water and sanitation, and on agricultural reforms.

*’

15

dialogue with the country, particularly on macro and structural issues; (ii)
keep the emphasis and
focus of the portfolio on improving the country’s capacity to monitor and evaluate progress
towards the MDGs and improve the quality o f social expenditure; (iii)broaden the Bank
structural reform agenda to include agriculture and the removal o f barriers to entry and
competition; and (iv) support the reform o f the power sector.
51. A CAS Progress Report was discussed b y the Board o f Directors on February 12, 2004.
The CAS Progress Report, which covers a period o f FY04 to FY05, was designed to support the
implementation of the government economic stabilization program, in close coordination with
the IMF and IDB. I t s main objective was to support interventions to: (i)
protect social programs
and human capital during the economic crisis while providing impetus to important social sector
reforms; (ii)
support renewed economic activity and sustained growth; and (iii)
deepen the Bank
Group’s analytical knowledge and dialogue with the Government on issues related to new and
emerging challenges (See Annex A4).
52. The CAS Progress Report had three lending scenarios: low, base, and high case. The base
case lending scenario included three operations for a total o f US$120 million (of which US$lOO
million for adjustment lending).2’ The high case lending scenario has an additional U S $ l 5 0
million in commitments (for a Power Sector Reform SAL) bringing the total lending envelope to
US$270 million. In addition to a satisfactory macro-economic framework, the triggers for the
high case lending scenario were identified as a satisfactory national pact on the future legal,
regulatory and policy framework for a sustainable electricity sector in the medium term, and a
binding and viable agreement between the government and private operators to settle arrears in
the electricity sector.

The base case lending was fully committed at the time of the Board’s discussion o f the
CAS Progress Report. Since then, significant progress in the energy sector has triggered the
preparation o f the Power Sector Reform SAL, which was recently submitted to the Board.
53.

54. At present, the W o r l d Bank portfolio in the Dominican Republic consists o f nine loans (one
adjustment, six investment, and two technical assistance loans) for an overall lending envelope
of US$238 million, out o f which US$138 million remain undisbursed. T w o o f the projects in the
portfolio are currently awaiting Congressional ratification: the Financial Sector TA (US$12.5
million) and the Power Sector TA (US$7.3 million). I t i s expected that Congress would approve
the two loans in the first half o f 2005. B y the time this CAS w i l l be presented to the Board (May
2005), one o f the seven projects currently under execution w i l l have closed. Three additional
projects w i l l have closed by December 2005. The development impact o f the IBRD portfolio
during the coming four years w i l l be heavily influenced by the five remaining projects (see
Annex C).

55. The overall performance o f the Bank portfolio in the Dominican Republic i s currently
below past standards. After years above regional averages, since FY04 and the onset o f the
economic crisis, the Dominican portfolio’s disbursement ratio fell well below the L A C regional
average. At present, the disbursement ratio22is equal to 9 percent compared to 17 percent at the

21 Social Crisis Response Adjustment Loan-SCRAL
(US$lOO million), and Power and Financial Sector Technical
Assistance loans (US$7.3 and 12.5 million respectively).
22 The disbursement ratio i s calculated as total IBRD Disbursements in Fiscal Year / Opening Un-disbursed Amount
at the beginning of the Fiscal Year. The disbursement ratio i s calculated on investment loans only.

16

regional level; and 33.3 percent o f the portfolio i s currently at risk23(or 54.7 percent o f the total
commitment amount). However, i t i s expected that considerable progress recently made in the
implementation o f two investment projects currently at risk (HIV/AIDS and Water and
Sanitation in Tourism Areas) and the disbursement o f the pending tranche o f the Social Sector
Crisis Adjustment Loan w i l l soon justify their upgrading and, therefore, improve the overall
performance o f the portfolio.
56. Net financial flows calculated on both adjustment and investment loans for the past six FYs
have been positive.24 However, since FY03, net financial flows produced by investment loans
only have decreased and become negative in FY03 and FY05, thus confirming the existence o f
systemic issues having a detrimental impact on disbursement performance. There are four main
causes o f slow disbursements: (i)
extensive delays in the Congressional ratification o f projects
exacerbated b y the fact that 2004 was an election year; (ii)
inadequate and untimely allocation o f
counterpart funds; (iii)
slow flow o f funds, due to cumbersome procedures for the disbursement
o f external funds deposited in the projects’ special accounts with the Central Bank; and (iv)
institutional weakness o f project implementation units, which are frequently reshuffled, thus
affecting the projects’ management capacity. The Bank i s working w i t h the authorities to
address these issues.

57. Three of nine current loans are single currency. For i t s new IBRD loans, the Dominican
Republic has moved to the Fixed Spread Loan (FSL) but has not taken advantage o f the
embedded risk management tools included in the F S L s that the Government could use to manage
the currency, interest rate and rollover risks.25 Furthermore, the Dominican Republic might want
to consider signing a Master Derivatives Agreement (MDA) with IBRD. The MDA would
provide access to a range o f IBRD risk management products (e.g., currency swaps, interest rate,
swaps, interest caps and collars, and commodity swaps) linked to both the existing and new
portfolio o f IBRD loans, as well as technical support from the W o r l d Bank’s Treasury staff.
58. IFC activities during the last five years have focused on priority sectors including
healthcare, telecommunications, transport, agribusiness, banking, and microfinance (see B o x 2).
Since FYOO, IFC has supported nine projects in diverse sectors for a total I F C committed
financing o f US$367 million (including US$13 1 million b y participating financial institutions).
As of March 31, 2005, IFC’s total committed portfolio in the Dominican Republic was US$383
million, including US$136 million f r o m participating banks. In addition, IFC has supported a
series o f technical studies, reviews and conferences on key topics, such as the Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) climate in the country and the development o f security markets.

This category refers t o those projects that are not meeting their development objectives due to unsatisfactory
implementation performance or other issues, such as, inter alia, inappropriate project design, unforeseeable adverse
economic and financial developments and changes in government policy.
24 A s o f April 4,2005, gross disbursements for the period 1999-2005 have reached US$348 million. Net flows (that
i s gross disbursement minus repayments o f principal amounts) and net transfers (that i s net flows minus interests and
fees) amount to US$167 million and US$3 1 m i l l i o n respectively.
The financial characteristics o f IBRD loans can be changed throughout their life.
23

’’

17

BOX 2: IFC’S PROJECTS FROM FY2000 TO MARCH 2005
In the healthcare sector, the Hospiten Clinica BBvaro project (US$4.0 million loan) in Punta Cana provides
access to healthcare services to the local population in the region and critical social infrastructure to the tourism
industry. I n FY03, as part o f a US$20 million regional investment for Hospiten, IFC supported the remodeling
and upgrading o f a recently acquired hospital in Santo Doming0 with US$7.3 million.
In telecommunications, IFC’s US$IOO million financing to Orange Dominicana (formerly known as “France
Telecom Dominicana”) in FY02-03, supports continued private sector participation in the telecommunications
sector and complements the Bank’s 1999 Telecommunications Regulatory Reform Project that created the new
regulator, INDOTEL.
In the transport sector, IFC’s US$30 million financing to the Caucedo port project has enhanced private sector
participation in maritime infrastructure services. Another US$60 million loan to Aerodom i s financing the
renovation and expansion of existing airport facilities, and the construction o f new ones, supporting the tourism
industry.

I n the tourism sector, IFC’s lending package o f US$70 million to Occidental will upgrade hotels and improve
the sector’s competitiveness.
In the agribusiness sector, IFC’s US$15 million financing to Pasteurizadora Rica, the country’s foremost
agribusiness company in the processing o f dairy and fruit juice sectors, has directly contributed to raising the
quality, sanitary, and environmental standards in the industry.
I n FY03, IFC supported the financial sector with financing and technical assistance including a US$20 million
credit line to Banco Hipotecano Dominican0 (BHD), the second largest domestic private bank.
I n the cement sector, IFC supported a newly formed company, Domicem, with US$48 million long-term
financing (mobilizing US$24 million from foreign commercial banks).
In FY04, IFC approved a US$20 million loan for a free trade zone project sponsored by Grupo M. I t includes
building an industrial park on Haiti’s side of the border between the Dominican Republic and Haiti.

59. MIGA has, as o f February 28, 2005, an outstanding portfolio that consists o f six contracts
o f guarantee in support o f five foreign investment projects in the infrastructure, tourism and
services sectors. The total amount o f gross exposure i s US$80.7 million (equivalent to 1.5% o f
MIGA’s gross portfolio), while the exposure net o f reinsurance amounts to US$53.3 million
(equivalent to 1.6% o f MIGA’s net exposure). MIGA’s exposure in Dominican Republic has
been decreasing during the last couple o f years in the previous CAS period, from a level of
US$282.2 million gross exposure attained in FY02 (accounting for 4.6% o f MIGA’s gross
portfolio at that time). During the previous CAS period, moreover, and in part as a result o f i t s
relative high level o f exposure in the country, MIGA has been involved in mediation efforts
concerning various investors in their projects. Notwithstanding this situation, MIGA values i t s
on-going, constructive relationship with the Dominican authorities.
60. World Bank Institute (WBI). During the previous CAS period, approximately 700
representatives from Dominican government agencies, c i v i l society organizations, academia, and
the private sector participated in WBI courses, conferences, Global Distance Learning Network
dialogues, and other learning programs. Programs delivered in the Dominican Republic included
courses on education reform, early childhood development, safety nets, urban management,
health sector reform, and environmental management.

18

,

V. Donor Coordination

Donor Agency

IDB
IMF
IBRD
FT T
--

USA
Canada
Venezuela
Germany

Total Loans and Grants Approved
and Ongoing (as of 12/31/2003
US$ million)

-

890
657
374
234
207
132
102
90
~

Main Areas of Intervention

State Modernization, Education , Health, and Agriculture
Macroeconomic policies and financial sector
Education, Health, and HIV/AIDS. Since 2004, also energq
Governance. Education. and Health
Governance, Health, and Private Sector Development
Water Supply and Sanitation.
Energy and Urban Infrastructure.
Energy, Environment, and Governance.

63. Donor assistance in the social sectors i s substantial and efforts are being made to structure
i t around long-term sector development plans. In the education sector, the IDB i s financing large
investments in basic and secondary education totaling US$200 million. The EU has just
negotiated a €54 million grant to support a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAP) around the Ten-Year
Education Sector Development Plan. The United States, Spain, Japan, Germany, Taiwan, the
United Nations (Le., UNICEF, WFP), and the W o r l d Bank are also active in the education sector.
All have indicated their willingness to work with the government on a SWAP strategy. In the
health sector, active donors include the United States, the EU, the IDB, UNICEF, the PanAmerican Health Organization, and the W o r l d Bank for a total amount o f US$325 million in
investment loans. All donors are supportive o f the Government’s health sector reform strategy,
although financing i s generally targeted at specific geographic regions o f the country.
64. During his first mandate, President Fernandez launched a series o f reforms in the area of
public sector modernization. IDB and the EU have been in the lead in supporting these efforts,

As per the 2003 World Bank Red Book for the Dominican Republic, the IDB, the IMF and the World Bank jointly
rovided 62 percent or US$] .9 billion o f total committed funds.
p7 Estimates for Brazil are not available.
26

19

notably for strengthening financial management, modernizing the Executive Branch, Congress
and the justice sector, reforming the civil service and advancing the decentralization agenda.
Common to these projects has been their slow implementation, mainly due to their sensitive
political nature.
65. Since the beginning o f the 2003 crisis, the World Bank, IDB and IMF have enhanced their
coordination both in policy dialogue, and in their lending and analytical program. This was
evidenced most recently at the IDB hosted Encerrona in October 2004, a high-level policy
dialogue on the country’s key development issues between Government and the three
international financial institutions. Among the institutions, the IMF i s leading the macro
dialogue; the IMF and IDB have taken a lead donor role in the financial sector, with the World
Bank providing complementary technical and financial support; the World Bank and U S A I D are
leading the donor support to electricity sector reform with IDB in a complementary role; the IDB
and World Bank are coordinating their support for the social sectors. The World Bank and the
IDB completed a joint Fiduciary Report in November 2004; the forthcoming Poverty Assessment
w i l l be produced in close collaboration w i t h the IDB and UNDP. The Bank (with the
involvement o f WBI), USAID, and IDB are also collaborating closely in defining a response to
President Fernindez’s request for assistance to the country’s anti-corruption efforts.

VI. The Role of the Bank Group: Looking Ahead
66. IBRD’s program in Dominican Republic was, until recently, relatively small. I t has
increased significantly over the last 18 months with Board approval o f three projects (US$120
million) and the current preparation o f an energy SAL o f $150 million. There are various
reasons for this: during the 1990s the economy grew impressively and Government was reluctant
to borrow from the Bank, in part because o f what i t considered excessive loan conditionality and
oversight. Since 1998, however, the country dialogue has intensified, supported b y key Bank
analytical work and the establishment o f a country office. Currently, i t i s in the energy sector
that the Government looks most closely to the Bank for support. Recently the Government has
also approached the Bank for advice in the many areas related to improving governance,
including anti-corruption and public procurement. I t i s clear that in both Government and
broader civil society there i s increasing appreciation for the Bank’s knowledge, technical
capacity, and global experience. The Government recognizes that Bank policy support brings
better quality o f public spending and that Bank impact can reach well beyond i t s specific loans.
I t also recognizes that Bank lending can attract and leverage additional financial sources. I t i s
therefore critical that the Bank’s program continue to include a broad range o f analytical and
lending products that can catalyze systemic impact.
67. IFC’s advantage lies primarily in specific transactions, catalyzing financing where IFC’ s
presence adds value. IFC’s strength i s derived f r o m i t s practical knowledge o f the financial and
corporate sectors, i t s dialogue with international and local private investors, hands-on experience
in local constraints to private investment, and accumulated knowledge and expertise. The
Corporation’s role in supporting the private sector i s widely acknowledged by investors in the
DR, as well as b y the authorities. According to evaluation reports and consultation with the
private sector, IFC’s clients believe that i t s additionality has been greater than the investment
amount indicates. I t s services are valued for mobilizing long-term financing, i t s dissemination o f
best practices in environmental, social, and corporate governance practices; corporate and
financial restructuring; and advisory services, especially in infrastructure. I F C has a multi-sector
global expertise - power, logistics, finance, agribusiness, manufacturing, tourism among others;
and i t s non-investment services notably to support SMEs. IFC’s actions and presence in the DR

20

during good and, more recently, bad times demonstrate the additionality o f IFC’s products and
expertise. Today I F C i s well-positioned to consolidate i t s investment experience and strong
reputation to expand its portfolio supporting the two pillars o f the CAS.
68. MIGA’s comparative advantage lies in i t s ability to mitigate risks for foreign investors,
both through its balance sheet products (notably, guarantees) and advisory services. Given
MIGA’s work experience in the Dominican Republic over the past few years, i t would be able to
support foreign investors seeking to expand or begin operations in the country. In addition,
within the Latin America and Caribbean region, the Dominican Republic i s one o f the target
markets for MIGA’s efforts to step-up i t s activities, through both an increase in product
availability and increasing guarantee exposure. MIGA has proposed a new technical assistance
program to the government and Center for Export and Investment (CEI, the national investment
promotion agency) that would assist in attracting higher levels and higher value added FDI to the
Dominican Republic. This i s effectively an effort to diversify the current FDI inflows away from
apparel and textiles which have come under significant pressure from China and the rest o f Asia.
Most o f MIGA’s activities would contribute to the First Pillar o f the new CAS, particularly
focusing on the role which FDI has in increasing competitiveness o f the economy through
technology transfer, increased competition and financing.

The World Bank Group Lending Program
69. The guiding principles for the Bank Group’s assistance program in the Dominican
Republic for the next four years are: (i)
a strategic approach, aimed at steering Bank Group
financing and analytical work to critical areas o f policy reform; (ii)
selectivity, focusing on areas
where the Bank Group has a comparative advantage and where there i s a gap in assistance; and
(iii)active partnering in both lending and analytical work with other development partners.
These principles entail choosing the most appropriate combination o f instruments to achieve the
desired development results, including IBRD lending, analytical work, capacity building,
learning and knowledge dissemination, and I F C and MIGA support. Some donors (IDB, JBIC
and soon the UN System) are in the process o f reviewing and redefining their country assistance
strategies. The preparation o f this CAS has been done in close collaboration with them,
especially with the IDB that has the same timeframe as the Bank Group.

Governance and institutional strengthening are the overarching focus o f this FY06-09 CAS.
This focus supports the Government’s plan to consolidate governance and strengthen public
institutions. The Government knows that in order to restore confidence in the country and i t s
institutions and improve the efficiency and effectiveness o f public programs, i t needs to take
decisive steps to improve governance, President Fernindez has made a specific request to the
Bank for assistance in the area o f anti-comption. Discussions are also ongoing with the
authorities to define the Bank’s possible assistance in other areas o f institutional development.
Improved governance and institutional strengthening are central to enhancing competitiveness,
key for an island economy such as the Dominican Republic where tourism and trade-related
industries are the main source o f growth. Lastly, governance and institutional strengthening,
particularly a much greater emphasis on issues o f transparency, regulation, and accountability,
are central elements in supporting the Dominican Republic’s transition from i t s caudillist past to
the demands o f a modern and sustainable economy.
70.

7 1.

T w o main Pillars w i l l support the focus on governance and institutional strengthening:

(i)stabilize the economy, improve competitiveness, and resume economic growth; and
(ii)
achieve greater social equity through human development and increased coverage and
quality o f basic public services.
21

Both Pillars link closely with the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) as the country’s
longer-term, higher-order strategic development objectives, and support the Government’s plan
to restore macroeconomic stability, improve the competitiveness o f the Dominican economy and
engender a greater level o f social and territorial cohesion. Special attention to the environment,
gender and youth, critical concerns in the Dominican Republic, w i l l be mainstreamed in these
pillars.
72. Improvements in governance and strengthening institutions cut across these two pillars and
are key to progress in these areas. For example, the success o f energy sector reforms included
under Pillar 1 w i l l depend on decisive actions to improve regulation and supervision in the
sector. The financial and banking reforms included in Pillar 1 also focus on strengthening
banking regulation and supervision, as well as the autonomy o f the Central Bank and anti-money
laundering. Similarly, improving the capacity o f Government agencies to manage public
resources competently, deliver public services efficiently and execute policy at the central and
decentralized levels i s critical to both improving the competitiveness o f the Dominican economy
and achieving greater social equity. All lending and non-lending activities in this CAS will
therefore include elements o f improving governance and strengthening institutions.
73. Table 4 summarizes the IBRD lending and analytical work program for the C A S period
including projects in the current portfolio.

22

Pillar 1: Stabilize the economy, improve competitiveness and restore economic growth
74. Bank support in this area would focus on providing technical and financial assistance for
electricity sector restructuring, banking sector reform, public sector modernization, and water
and sanitation management. Given the significant support by the IDB to agriculture, there i s in
this CAS no free-standing support to this sector. 28

75. A sustainable solution to the electricity sector crisis i s o f paramount importance for
restoring macroeconomic stability, resuming growth and improving economic competitiveness.
There are also many linkages with human development such as the importance o f reliable energy
services in hospitals and lighting in evening schools. During the period o f this CAS, the Bank
w i l l support the reform o f the energy sector through the Power Sector TA (US$7.3 million)
currently awaiting congressional r a t i f i ~ a t i o n ?and
~ a high case Energy Sector Adjustment Loan
o f U S $ 1 5 0 m i l l i o n under the high case o f the 2004 CAS Progress Report which has recently
been submitted to the Board.
76. In the FY06-09 CAS, the Bank w i l l continue to support the reform o f the energy sector
with two additional operations: a Power Sector Development Policy Loan (US$lOO million) in
FY07 and a Power Sector Investment Loan (US$30 million) in FY08. The Bank’s financial and
technical assistance in the power sector w i l l support Government efforts to curb the sector’s
financial hemorrhage and get i t onto a path o f medium-term financial sustainability. President
Fernindez has expressed his commitment to sector reform with aggressive corrective measures.
The government’s energy team has developed an action plan, prepared in collaboration with the
World Bank, U S A I D and IDB which involves subsidy retargeting, particularly a better focus on
the poor, implementation o f a formula for faster adjustment o f retail tariffs to the exchange rate,
fuel prices, and inflation, a credible loss reduction plan, and improvements in collections. The
last measure i s critical in a sector marred b y theft and non-payment as well as large technical
losses. There are additional constraints in the sector o f both a technical ( e g , the inadequacy o f
the transmission network) and institutional nature (e.g., the establishment and respect o f clear
boundaries between the main three sector agencies). The Power Sector Development Policy
Loan, supported b y the Power Sector T A project, w i l l ensure continuity in the Bank’s support to
the sector and provide critical financing and technical assistance to the government to enable i t to
cover the declining sector deficits while implementing i t s aggressive plan for i t s financial
recovery and sustainability. The Power Sector Investment Loan w i l l finance the strengthening of
transmission network, further upgrade the sector’s institutional capacity, and extend and improve
energy services to the rural and urban poor.

77. As reform progresses in the power sector, I F C w i l l seek to support those projects that
improve the financial sustainability o f the sector, are environmentally sustainable, and ensure a
reliable source o f power, priced at socially accepted and commercially viable rates. One area of
focus w i l l be renewable energy, notably wind power.
78. Traditional growth sectors such as tourism and manufacturing w i t h the F T Z w i l l benefit
from IFC’s intervention. Faced with competition from other Caribbean destinations, the tourism
industry i s in need of investments in: (i)
new products development (eco-tourism, higher-end

In 2003, the IDB approved a US$55 million loan to enhance the efficiency o f the Dominican agriculture by
supporting the adoption of new technologies and the design’of new commercial policies, and promoting a
reorganization o f the public agricultural sector.
29 Congressional approval o f the energy TA and a financial TA are expected i n the first half o f 2005.
28

24

accommodations), (ii)new infrastructure accommodations to renew existing ones, and (iii)
ancillary infrastructure (healthcare). With the various trade liberalization initiatives, FTZ w i l l
also face increasing competitive pressures, but also new investment opportunities. I F C w i l l
support opportunities whereby FTZ can develop inward linkages towards the local economy, and
help local and regional players consolidate their competitive position. Improving the DR
competitiveness implies also new investment in infrastructure, some involving the private sector,
and others partnering the public and private sectors (PPPs). Investment in transport i s essential
for the tourism (airports) and manufacturing sectors (roads, ports, logistics). As opportunities
arise I F C w i l l consider projects in these areas.
79. Strengthening the regulatory and supervisory framework and institutional capacity in the
financial sector i s a critical element o f the government’s stabilization program and necessary to
avoid the occurrence o f other financial sector crises. Through the Financial Sector TA Loan
(US$12.5 million), approved b y the Bank’s Board in 2004 and currently awaiting Congress’
ratification, the Bank w i l l support the second phase o f the government’s efforts to reform the
banking sector. The first phase, which i s ongoing, i s supported b y the IMF and the IDB. The
Financial Sector TA Loan focuses on the strengthening o f the institutional and financial
infrastructure in the medium term, including the financial regulatory agencies, and also supports
activities geared at the sound implementation o f the new pension system, modernizing public
debt management, and recapitalizing the Central Bank. Moreover, follow-up activities o f the
recently delivered Report on the Observance o f Standards and Codes (ROSC) on Accounting &
Auditing practices w i l l enhance corporate entities’ compliance with international financial
reporting standards, which in turn w i l l allow financial institutions in the country to reduce their
exposure to credit risk; i t w i l l also help restore confidence in, and foster the development of, the
corporate sector. Achieving reliable financial information and tighter accountability
arrangements w i l l also require amendments to corporate laws. The Bank w i l l provide technical
advice to the authorities as appropriate.
80. IFC w i l l contribute to the financial sector reform, b y selectively supporting private sector
financial operations, notably the ones broadening access to financing. A strengthened regulatory
framework in the financial sector w i l l open new opportunities for the private sector. I F C w i l l
entice private sector participation b y offering structured finance products to the leading private
banks, and selectively supporting operations broadening access to finance SMEs. In addition,
existing debt and equity opportunities in housing and pension funds w i l l be explored.

81. An Institutional Strengthening TA Loan (US$10 million) and a Public Sector
Modernization and Competitiveness Development Policy Loan (US$50 million) w i l l focus on
essential reforms to improve public sector efficiency and accountability and support anticorruption initiatives. Improving governance and modernizing the public sector in the
Dominican Republic w i l l be a long-term process. Given the constraints, including the political
opposition, a feasible strategy might be a program designed comprehensively but introduced and
implemented in a multi-phased fashion initially in a small number o f areas and subsequently
extended to other areas.

82. The Institutional Strengthening TA Loan w i l l in a first phase support the Government’s
anti-corruption efforts and the core areas o f financial management with an emphasis o n public
procurement, budgeting, control, and public debt (see B o x 3). The procurement component w i l l
build and expand on initial actions financed b y the on-going IDF grant. In addition, the TA loan
would support some initial human resource management reforms, such as the development o f a
live registry o f all public employees, development o f mechanisms to ensure that new employees
are hired through merit-based, competitive procedures, changes in staffing patterns are
25

anticipated in approved budgets, and steps to develop a career system for a set of employees in
core government functions. These reform areas are currently under discussion with the
Government. The TA loan may have an E-government component t o promote transparency in
the public sector and make i t easier to get information to society at large.
BOX 3: FINANCIAL, PROCUREMENT AND HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ISSUES
Financial, procurement, and human resource management reforms are high priorities for restoring macroeconomic
stability and laying the groundwork for further public sector modernization.

The key instrument offinancial management reform has been an integrated system (SIGEF), which now captures
budget formulation and disbursements for the central government agencies. Although SIGEF records
commitments, it does not capture actual expenditures-so that there i s no way o f telling whether disbursed funds
have been used to pay outstanding commitments or diverted to some other purpose. The revenue, accounting, and
reporting modules o f SIGEF are less developed; monitoring public debt i s through a separate and still incomplete
system (SIGADE); and the procurement module i s currently under design. Adding the missing modules,
designating a central and ministerial office to manage and maintain the system, improving the quality of
budgetary formulation by linking expenditures to programs and objectives, and moving toward pluri-annual
planning are obvious next steps. Further critical measures, which SIGEF alone cannot accomplish, are the
elimination o f a cumbersome series o f ex-ante controls and a reassignment o f functions and responsib
among the various offices involved in the financial management process. This w i l l mean, inter alia, reducing the
roles played by the Office of the Budget and the Contraloria (internal control), possible movement o f the latter
out o f the Office o f the President and into the Ministry o f Finance, and strengthening the operations of the
Treasury, the General Accounting Office, and the Cfimara de Cuentas (external control). Also important i s the
need to better control the debt o f the line ministries and decentralized agencies.
The critical issues in the area o f public sector procurement include an obsolete and inconsistent regulatory
framework, non-enforcement of existing rules and lack o f an effective policy generation and oversight function.
These problems are compounded by the significant systemic weakness in budget, controls and human resource
management. Among the main consequences are indiscriminate use o f direct contracting, general lack of
accountability, inefficient use of public resources, and widespread perception o f the procurement system as nontransparent. The absence o f a comprehensive procurement reform strategy consistent with the broader objectives
o f state modernization and the country’s political economy contributed to the lack o f success o f various previous
attempts to improve the system’s efficiency and transparency. This strategy should include a sustained long-term
effort to build political support for the adoption o f a modern procurement law, medium-term actions such as
establishing a procurement policy unit with adequate resources, a clear mandate, and an effective bid protest
system, as well as short-term actions that are easy to implement and likely to result in quick gains. The latter
include a bridge decree consistent with international standards, an e-procurement strategy to be implemented i n
steps and focusing initially on e-transparency, a more efficient government supply strategy, standard bidding
documents and guidelines, a procurement monitoring and evaluation system, strengthened internal control,
procurement planning and contract administration system, and a comprehensive capacity building plan. The
capacity building plan should address public employee attitudes and government service culture as well as
strengthen procurement management skills.
Human resource management, while critical to the efficient operation o f any organization and a clear
impediment to improved public sector performance in the Dominican Republic, remains a daunting task. The
government’s proposal to create an all-inclusive civil service within eight years seems both excessively optimistic
and possibly ill-advised, given the absence o f information on quantitative and qualitative needs for virtually all
organizations, possible changes in these requirements as their missions shift, the traditional and nearly universal
reliance on patronage appointments, and the lack o f objective instruments for vetting candidates for either present
needs or those o f an unknown near future. A more realistic first step would be the creation o f a live registry of all
current employees, whatever their contractual status, so that the government at least knows who it i s paying for
doing what, can identify obvious abuses, and can begin to enforce existing regulations as regards individual
appointments and changes i n agency staffing patterns. A second step would be to advance the regularization of
personnel status within core functional areas-budgeting, control, accounting, and procurement, leaving time to
consider whether a career service i s desirable for the rest o f the public employees. The fact that 97 percent of
current employees lack j o b tenure should be seen as an advantage and providing flexibility, offering ample
opportunity for adjusting staffing patterns to real needs.

26

83. The Public Sector Modernization and Competitiveness Development Policy Loan would
focus on further efforts to modernize the public sector. I t would enhance growth-supporting
public services and financial management reform through specific interventions strengthening
Government procurement, accounting, and reporting systems and their ability to accurately track
spending, assess performance and progress, and report on results. I t would also support a review
and possible re-definition of the mandates of the control agencies and their roles in ensuring
compliance w i t h the rule o f law and the necessary enforcement mechanisms, including better
coordination between the cash and public debt management processes. The Development Policy
Loan would also focus on human resource reform including hiring practices, staffing patterns,
and the introduction o f new incentive and evaluation systems, and could support policy reforms
to increase the country’s competitiveness through a strengthening o f the investment climate and
improvement in trade facilitation. Both the Institutional Strengthening TA and the Development
Policy Loan would be designed in close coordination with, and build on and complement, the
ongoing efforts supported b y the IDB, the EU, USAID, and others in related areas. Concerning
the business environment, I F C w i l l explore areas in which the IFC Technical Assistance facility
could provide i t s service notably concerning the simplification o f business registration at the
municipal level.
84. Poor management o f the water and wastewater services i s seriously affecting both human
health and the sustainable development and competitiveness o f the Dominican tourism sector
(CEA FY04). Declining quality o f coastal waters and health hazards, products o f poor
environmental practices, threaten established tourist destinations, such as Puerto Plata. Newer
resort developments, such as Punta Cana and B i v a r o are also under threat o f environmental
degradation due to unsustainable groundwater management. Through a Water and Sanitation
Investment Adaptable Program Loan (US$20 million in FY07 and US$50 million in FY09), the
Bank would support the development and implementation o f a national waste water and solid
waste strategy. The objective o f this strategy w i l l be to guarantee the appropriate management o f
water resources and the efficiency and financial sustainability in the provision o f water and
sanitation services, taking into consideration the increase in coverage needs, especially to the
poor. I t may also provide critical support to the environment ministry to strengthen i t s capacity
to engage on the controversial Water L a w and to the government in revising the draft o f the
Water Supply and Sanitation L a w to ensure the appropriate institutional context for an efficient
provision o f water and sanitation services. The loan will also support the development o f new
landfills and waste water treatment and disposal facilities in tourist areas, beginning with the
region o f Puerto Plata. Close policy coordination with other donors w i l l be critical for an
integrated approach. This loan would draw on the lessons learned in the ongoing Water and
Sanitation LIL. In order to help defray the operating costs o f landfills, the Bank’s Carbon
Finance Business Unit would be solicited to purchase facilities’ emissions reductions. I F C w i l l
work with the Bank to seek innovative solutions t o address water and management issues,
particularly in the tourist zones.

85. Additionally, a GEF project to provide support to the national park system for enhancing
tourism revenues would be combined with a watershed management program (financed by an
external partner) to reduce the impact o f floods resulting from hurricanes. An application for a
grant (Japanese Social Development Fund) to support the development o f a cooperative crossborder framework for disaster mitigation between the Dominican Republic and Haiti has also
recently been made. This grant would finance the development o f a memorandum of
understanding between the two national c i v i l protection offices and the setting up o f a

27

communications system between them, site visits, and simulations to improve the response
following a large-scale disaster.
86. Development of the mining sector with F C ’ s support could help to diversify the country’s
sources o f growth, provided the authorities demonstrate their willingness and ability to apply and
enforce sustainable environmental practices. F C participation would be linked to sound project
design, to promoting sustainable economic development, and utilizing project generated funds
for management of the past mining environmental legacy, in line with the recommendations o f
the Extractive Industries Report.

Pillar 2: Achieve Greater Social Equity
87. Improving economic opportunities for the poor, human development and basic service
delivery are critical to reducing poverty and reaching the MDGs in the Dominican Republic in a
sustainable fashion. Current access to jobs and social and basic infrastructure services i s
inequitable and the quality o f basic public services i s inadequate. This holds true for both rural
and urban poor areas. Government spending on primary education and health services has not
filled the gap but has actually declined as a percentage o f GDP.
88. Bank support in this area would focus on providing technical and financial assistance for
health sector reform, improving targeting o f social programs and improving access to basic
social and infrastructure services, and environmental management in poor rural and urban areas.
B y applying a particular focus on those age groups which have suffered the most negative impact
o f the recent crisis-and which have particular relevance in reaching the MDGs-the Bank
support would also target poor children (ages 0-5) and at-risk youth (15-24) across several
operations in i t s portfolio.

89. In the health sector, a US$30 million Health Sector Adaptable Program Loan became
effective in January 2005. I t s main objectives are to: (i)
contribute to reducing child mortality
support implementation of the new legal framework for
rates and improving maternal health; (ii)
the health sector, particularly the institutional strengthening o f the health ministry (SESPAS), the
development o f insurance mechanisms, and the configuration o f regional health networks; and
(iii)
support preparation, validation and dissemination o f supplementary norms and regulations to
the general Health L a w (42-01) and the Social Security Law (87-01). In addition, the Bank i s
financing a US$25-million H I V - A I D S prevention and control program (scheduled to close in
FY07). The project aims at reducing the spread o f the H I V / A I D S epidemic through: (i)
the
increase in health prevention and control programs targeted to high risk population groups; (ii)
the expansion o f awareness on HIV/AIDS infection and prevention methods amongst the
population, and (iii)the strengthening o f the institutional capacity o f the participating
governmen tal agencies.
90. In the education sector, a $42-million Early Childhood Education Project under
implementation i s focused on poor children aged 0-5. I t aims to raise enrollment in pre-school
education (kindergarten) to at least 86 percent among poor children, and to improve quality and
supply o f both formal and non-formal early childhood development activities. I t i s anticipated
that this loan w i l l be partially restructured in FY07 given the Government’s intention to prepare
a Sector Wide Approach (SWAP) in the education sector.
91. IFC w i l l continue to support private sector involvement in the health sector as well as in the
education sector. In education, particular attention will be given to projects promoting the
expansion o f private higher education to meet the challenges o f the changing environment

28

resulting from world trade liberalization, including technical assistance geared towards
vocational training.
92. Zmproved social equity w i l l be promoted through a US$50 million Social Sector
Investment Loan (SSIL). Building on the initial reforms supported b y the SCRAL, this loan w i l l
include support in three critical areas with a particular emphasis on targeting the most
vulnerable: (i)
Consolidation and targeting-through the development o f the Sistema Unico de
Beneficiarios (SIUBEN), which uses the national poverty map (based on the 2002 census and
relying on unsatisfied basic needs) just updated under the S C R A L and household surveys in
areas o f extreme poverty to establish a database o f poor households eligible for public social
programs. This component could also include results-based disbursements to support conditional
cash-transfers to support poor families in maintaining investments in human capital (for
example, obtaining early childhood care and in keeping youth in school to improve their changes
for productive employment), with a focus on the inclusion o f both new and existing poor and
undocumented families. (ii)
E q u i t y and inclusion-this component w i l l finance investments in
all the maternities and offices o f the Junta Central Electoral so that every child leaves the
maternity/hospital with a birth certificate, and every undocumented child under the age o f 16
receives a “late” birth certificate. I t w i l l also finance efforts to help undocumented mothers
obtain their birth certificates and/or c&duZas (ID cards); and (iii)
Y o u t h development-this
component w i l l address some o f the growing concerns in the country about youth unemployment
and related risky behaviors and the need to upgrade the skills o f the labor force. I t may include
pilot activities related to j o b training and life skills focused on out-of school youth together with
lifelong learning needs o f adults, including relevant labor market policies. The development o f
community colleges may also be considered to address increasing demand for employees with
higher education and faster adaptation to labor marketkompetitiveness opportunities, if this i s
not part o f the education SWAp. Each o f these components w i l l complement ongoing support
provided b y the World Bank, IDB and EU. The S S I L w i l l also support Government efforts to
exploit the well functioning telecommunications network to improve social services and promote
the use o f I C T in schools, hospitals, and clinics.
93. The government has in its program committed to improving the living conditions in rural
communities. A Community Development Project w i l l support rural communities to implement
priority improvements in their immediate environment.
The project w i l l support rural
communities to implement priority improvements in their immediate environment. I t w i l l seek
to strengthen the links between local governments and communities, and explore innovative
cost-sharing mechanisms to leverage the 10 percent o f the national revenue that i s allocated to
local governments (40 percent o f these revenues are destined for investment). The project w i l l
draw on lessons from ongoing community driven efforts in Jamaica and elsewhere, including the
positive experience o f a pilot component o f the current watershed management project in San
JosC de Ocoa, which i s implemented through a local N G O (ADESJO). This community-driven
project entails sound watershed management (i.e., reforestation, terracing, and erosion control),
rural infrastructure development, social development (with a stronger gender component), and
rural income generation. There i s a potential scope to link the proposed community project with
possible GEF initiatives for communities in watershed management and erosion control on both
sides o f the Dominican-Haitian border. Such an initiative would build on the lessons learned in a
previous GEF-supported project for biodiversity and preservation o f national resources, and
could incorporate innovative approaches to integrate youth both in the identification of priorities
and in the implementation o f actions in order to complement other efforts underway to address
out-of-school/out-of-work youth.

29

Urban territorial development i s a high priority for the administration, which i s concerned
with the absence o f urban land-use planning and flood control, the environmental degradation o f
urban areas (wastewater and solid waste), and the lack o f reliable services in low-income
neighborhoods. The legal and institutional framework for urban development i s weak and needs
to be updated. This project would seek to strengthen the Government’s capacity in these areas
while also providing improved basic infrastructure services in low-income neighborhoods. The
project w i l l target vulnerable children and youth in low-income areas. The experience o f using
youth both in the identification and the execution o f project activities w i l l draw on the lessons
from elsewhere. The government intends to host a workshop on urban development which w i l l
provide further context for the proposed project.
94.

Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAAs)
95. During 2004, the Bank prepared a comprehensive series o f analytical studies related to
economic governance and public sector management including the Public Expenditure Review,
the Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and the Country Procurement
Assessment Report ( C P A R t t h e last two in partnership with IDB-and the recently delivered
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) on Accounting and Auditing
practices. The Bank also completed reviews o f trade and labor competitiveness issues and the
implications for agriculture of CAFTA-DR, and prepared a Country Environmental Strategy.
The ongoing dissemination o f these reports represents a key instrument for policy discussion
with the Government on the country’s development priorities and the Bank assistance strategy.
96. A recent review o f AAA b y the Quality Assurance Group w i l l point to areas where the
process b y which analytical work i s undertaken and disseminated can be made more effective.
Past challenges include the lengthy process in getting finalized analyticai work cleared b y the
government and into the public domain. The AAA review w i l l recommend the establishment o f
a “rapid response fund” for analytical work to be carried out under the leadership o f Dominican
institutions. Such a fund could be created in collaboration w i t h a couple o f reputable local
institutions and include support b y other development partners.

97. All AAA covered b y this CAS w i l l address issues o f governance and institutional
strengthening and provide valuable input to the policy dialogue, linking closely with the lending
program to modernize the economy and promote social equity (see Table 5). The AAA w i l l be
o f two types: formal and informal. A brief account o f each study i s provided below. Partnership
with other donors, including the IDB, UNDP, and CEPAL, in the preparation o f these reports
w i l l be sought. Discussions to this effect are ongoing with some o f the development partners and
w i l l ensure the Bank avoids duplication, maximizes the use o f available technical and financial
resources, and builds common ground around critical policy issues.30

30 Preliminary discussions have confirmed that few donors program and carry out analytical work beyond the studies
that are financed as part of the projects they support. In fact, many indicate to use World Bank analytical work.
Some, including USAID, support analytical work i n the period preceding the preparation of their country strategy.

30

Table 5: Ongoing and Planned Analytical and Advisory Activities
Fiscal
Year
FY05

FY06
FY07

FY08

Pillar 1: Stabilize the economy, improve
competitiveness, and resume economic growth

Trade and labor competitiveness issues (recently delivered)
Report on observance and standard codes (ROSC, recently
delivered)
Rural Assessment (recently delivered)
Country economic memorandum (ongoing)
Demand-driven just-in-time policy notes**
SMEs, employment and structural change**
Money laundering**
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
Review of country regulatory framework
Demand-driven just-in-time policy notes**
Demand-drivenjust-in-time policy notes**

**Informal notes.

Pillar 2: Achieve greater social equity
Poverty assessment (ongoing)

Transport for the urban poor (ongoing)
Demand-drivenjust-in-time policy notes**
Social protection strategy review (regional;
ongoing)
Crime and violence (regional study)
Migration, remittances and the diaspora (regional
study)
Youth at risk**
Demand-driven just-in-time policy notes**
Demand-driven just-in-time policy notes**

enterprises and small and medium-sized firms, many o f which are in the informal market.
Requests for Bank analytical work on SMEs, Employment, and Structural Change to support
public policy development in these areas were put forward and confirmed b y the Government.
This informal work w i l l be carried out in close collaboration with IFC.
102. The government i s concerned about i t s l o w rating in various governance surveys and has
requested assistance f r o m the Bank and USAID for work on anti-corruption. An informal study
on Money Laundering issues in the Dominican Republic w i l l provide recommendations as to the
measures required to develop and implement a comprehensive and effective anti-money
laundering measures and combating the financing o f terrorism (AML/CFT) program. The
country team i s exploring the possibility of receiving technical and financial assistance from the
Financial Market Integrity Group of the World Bank. This study would build on existing work
b y U S A I D and others in related areas.

103. A regional study on Crime and Violence w i l l focus on the impact o f crime on investment,
tourism, migration, poverty, and social cohesion. This would be a multisectoral endeavor aimed
at developing recommendations that would draw on experience from successful interventions in
Brazil and elsewhere. An informal trustfund financed country-level study on youth at risk w i l l
update and improve existing statistics on youth, assess the factors contributing to risky behavior
(including crime, violence, adolescent pregnancy, risky sexual behavior, drugs, substance abuse,
etc.), identify existing programs to address these factors, and provide an assessment o f the
relative impact o f existing interventions. I t w i l l feed into the government’s overall policy
formulation in the development o f the SSIP, as well as the design o f relevant pilot interventions.
104. The Bank i s currently developing a Social Protection Strategy Review paper for the
Caribbean, including a focus on the Dominican Republic. The objective of the strategy i s to
strengthen the Bank’s ability to support clients on social protection through: (i)better
understanding the key socio-economic risks, existing country-level social protection programs,
coverage and implementation gaps, and outstanding country-level needs; (ii)stronger
coordination with country counterparts and donors; and (iii)
more strategic emphasis on the
Bank’s comparative advantage in the Region. Work on the strategy includes an analytical
component as well as a component focused on consultation and consensus building among key
stakeholders.

105. A regional study on Migration, Remittances and the Diaspora w i l l examine the impact of
migration and i t s implications for public policy decisions surrounding the financing o f higher
education and skills development; the impact, facilitation, and potential leverage o f remittance
flows; and the potential for the growth o f niche markets among the Diaspora. This work w i l l be
undertaken in close collaboration with other donors, most notably the IDB.
106. Given the pivotal importance o f infrastructure services to the competitiveness and
modernization o f the economy, a review o f the Country Regulatory Framework w i l l compare the
Dominican experience in specific public utilities sectors, such as telecommunications and
energy, and draw lessons as to what has worked and has not worked.
107. Through just-in-time policy notes the Bank will also follow-up on specific findings and
recommendations of the Fiduciary Assessment, the Poverty Assessment, Country Economic
Memorandum, the Report on the Observance o f Standards and Codes (ROSC) on Accounting &
Auditing practices, and other issues jointly identified with the authorities during the CAS period.

32

VII. Program and Risks
Lending Program and Scenarios
108. ZBRD's Lending Scenarios and Instrument Choice. The base case lending scenario
includes eight operations for a total of US$260 million over 4 years (see Table 6). The high case
lending scenario consists o f US$lOO million (two operations: a Development Policy Loan for
public sector modernization and the second phase o f the Water and Sanitation Services
Investment Program APL2) in commitments additional to the base case, bringing the total
lending envelope to US$360 million. In the low case scenario, the Bank would support four
operations (the Institutional Strengthening Technical Assistance Project, the Social Sectors
Investment Project, the Community Development Project, and the Urban Territorial
Development Project) for a total o f U S $ l l O million.

1

Table 6: Proposed IBRD Lending Scenarios for FY06-09
FY

Low Case
Institutional Strengthening
TA Project I(US$IOM)

and TA
support

Community Dev't Project
(US$30m)

FY08
FY09
FY07

Development
Policy
Lending

I

Energy Investment Project
(US$30M)
Urban Territorial
Development Project
(US$20m)

I InvestmentProgram N L 2
Water and Sanitation

Power Sector DPL (US$100M)

(US$SOm)

"

Public Sector Modemization
and Competitiveness DPL

US$llOM

I
Carbon
Finance
GRAND
TOTAL

Same as base case plus:

Water and Sanitation APLl
(US$20M)

FY08

I TOTAL

1

Same as low case plus:

High Case

Social Sectors Investment
Project (US$SOM)

FY07

I

Base Case

I

Watershed management in
Border Areas (US$IOM)

FY07

National Park System (if cofinancing partner i s identified)
(US$SM)
Amount and timing to be
determined
US$llOM IBRD + $15M
GEF + Carbon Finance

US$260M IBRD + $15MGEF
+ Carbon Finance

33

US$360M IBRD + $15M
GEF + Carbon Finance

109. IBRD triggers. The base case has two general triggers for all lending and additional
triggers for Development Policy Lending (see Table 7). The first trigger for the base case
scenario i s satisfactory portfolio performance. A satisfactory portfolio requires that less than 50
percent o f the projects are at risk or that less than 33 percent o f the commitments are at risk. The
second trigger for all base case lending i s a satisfactory macroeconomic performance as
evidenced, for example, b y continued progress on the key elements o f the Government’s
economic stabilization program supported inter alia by the IMF-supported SBA. In addition,
Development Policy Lending in the base case (for the power sector) w i l l require an 18-month
track record o f satisfactory macroeconomic performance, within this CAS period, as evidenced,
for example, b y the successful implementation o f the Government economic stabilization
program supported inter alia b y the IMF-supported SBA. The CAS Progress Report, scheduled
for FY08, w i l l review and define performance benchmarks for the macroeconomic framework in
order to modulate the lending program in the outer years o f this CAS. Key areas where
satisfactory performance w i l l be expected include fiscal balance, debt management and the debt
to GDP ratio, and progress on the implementation of measures to strengthen the banking system
and financial regulation and supervision (see paragraph 17). The Power Sector Development
Policy Lending operation w i l l also require demonstrated sustained improvement in cash recovery
and the financial sustainability of the sector, e.g., continued adherence to the viable and binding
agreement between Government and the power companies with regard to the arrears in the
sector, including punctual payments o f Government obligations to power utilities to ensure that
new government arrears do not emerge.
110. The Bank’s high case lending scenario, like the base case, requires satisfactory
macroeconomic performance (see Table 7). An additional trigger for the high case Water and
Sanitation Investment Program (APL2) w i l l be the satisfactory implementation o f the strategy for
the efficient provision o f water and sanitation services, developed as a condition for APLl. The
Development Policy Loan for Public Sector Modernization and Competitiveness in the high case
w i l l require at least a 24-month track record o f satisfactory macroeconomic performance, within
this CAS period, as evidenced, for example, b y the successful implementation o f the
Government economic stabilization program supported inter alia by the IMF-supported SBA.
The CAS Progress Report, scheduled for FY08, w i l l review and define performance benchmarks
for the macroeconomic framework in order to modulate the lending program in the outer years of
this CAS. Key areas where satisfactory performance w i l l be expected include fiscal balance,
debt management and the debt to GDP ratio, and progress on the implementation o f measures to
strengthen the banking system and financial regulation and supervision (see paragraph 17).
Additional triggers for the high case Development Policy Loan for Public Sector Modernization
and Competitiveness w i l l be: (i)
satisfactory progress in the implementation o f the action plans to
improve the national procurement and financial management systems (see paragraph 45); (ii)
the
formulation and beginning implementation o f a Government strategy to increase
competitiveness, including addressing trade-related issues linked to DR-CAFTA, the Multifibre
Agreement phase-out, and the elimination o f FTZ preferential treatment mandated b y the WTO;
and (iii)
the formulation of-with broad c i v i l society participation-and satisfactory progress in
implementing a government anti-conuption strategy.
111. Within the agreed upon lending envelope, IBRD loans, guarantees and hedging products

could be applied at two levels (country portfolio and individual projects) and two dimensions
(existing portfolio and new pipeline). At the country portfolio level, well structured IBRD
financial products could support the Dominican Republic to better manage risks inherent in the
portfolio o f IBRD debt. This could be achieved through the use of: (i)
traditional IBRD lending
34

as needed; (ii)
guarantees; and (iii)
IBRD intermediation for long dated derivatives transactions.
At the project level, the Government can use the flexible features embedded in IBRD loans along
with IBRD risk management products and guarantees to maximize developmental impacts of
certain programs by achieving the desired cost/risk structure of certain existing projects or
structuring more adequate financing for new ones.
Table 7: Lending Triggers for the CAS Base Case and High Case
Triggers t o Stay i n the Base Case

rriggers to Shift to t h e High Case

Satisfactory Portfolio Performance ( 4 0 % projects
at risk or <33% o f commitments at risk)
Satisfactory macroeconomic performance, as
evidenced, for example, by continued progress on the
key elements o f the Government economic
stabilization program supported inter alia by the IMFfinanced Stand-By Arrangement (SBA). The CAS
Progress Report, scheduled for FY08, will review and
define, in further detail, the specific parameters on
which macroeconomic performance will be assessed
for the program in the outer years o f this CAS. Key
areas where satisfactory performance w i l l be expected
include fiscal balance, debt management and the debt
to G D P ratio, and progress on the implementation o f
measures to strengthen the banking system and
financial regulation and supervision (see para. 17).
a) 18-month track record, within
this CAS period, o f satisfactory
macroeconomic performance, as
evidenced, for example, by the
successful implementation o f the
Energy Sector
Government economic
DPL
stabilization program supported
inter alia by the IMF-supported
SBA;
b) sustained improvement in cash
recovery index;
c) financial sustainability o f the
sector; and
d) continued adherence to viable
and binding agreement between
Govemment and power
companies on settlements o f
arrears

jame as in Base Case
iame as in Base Case

Water and
Sanitation
4PL2

Public
Sector
Modemization and
Competitiveness
DPL

a) satisfactory implementation o f
strategy for efficient provision o f
water and sanitation services,
developed wit!, Water and Sanitation
A P L l in base case scenario
a) 24-month track record o f
satisfactory macroeconomic
performance, within this CAS period,
as evidenced, for example, b y the
successful implementation o f the
Government economic stabilization
program supported inter alia by the
IMF-supported SBA
b) satisfactory implementation o f
action plans to improve national
financial management and
procurement systems
c) formulation and beginning
implementation o f a Govemment
strategy to increase competitiveness,
including addressing trade-related
issues linked to DR-CAFTA, the
Multifibre Agreement phase-out, and
the elimination o f FTZ preferential
treatment mandated by the W T O
d) formulation of-with broad civil
society participation-and
satisfactory progress in implementing
a government anti-corruption
strategy

112. IFC’s assistance w i l l focus on restoring confidence in the private sector supporting projects
generating growth, improving the country’s competitiveness, and contributing towards greater
social equity. This w i l l include providing support in areas where the country has competitive

35

advantage or that are hard currency earners o f the economy (such as tourism, mining, and free
trade zone) and developing inward linkages towards the local economy. T o improve
competitiveness, I F C w i l l support investment in infrastructure (notably transport and logistics) as
opportunities arise. Together with IBRD, pending progress on the regulatory side, i t w i l l provide
assistance to the power sector, including favoring investment into renewable energy projects. In
the financial sector, I F C w i l l continue to support corporate governance strengthening (via
technical assistance). I F C may also selectively provide support to the financial sector as market
conditions improve. Moreover, to improve social cohesion, I F C i s seeking ways to support
SMEs and micro-enterprises via the L A C Technical Assistance facility, notably supporting
projects with S M E linkages, or via financial sector projects, which broaden SMEs access to
financing. In the social sectors, I F C w i l l seek to support private sector involvement in health and
education with the objective o f broadening access to the poorer segments o f the population, and
to improve the s k i l l s o f the labor force.
113. MZGA w i l l look to support projects to diversity i t s portfolio away f r o m concentration in the
power sector, working with project sponsors who are exploring long-term investments in the
country. I t w i l l leverage i t s strong capital base to provide guarantees and advice investors in
sectors, such as infrastructure sub-sectors other than power, where risk perceptions may deter
foreign investment. MIGA has been actively involved in mediating disputes which have arisen
in the country, with the view to ensuring win-win outcomes for investors and the government. In
terms o f technical assistance, MIGA has begun consultations on a medium-term program to
boost the national investment promotion program. This work w i l l follow and draw upon
previous work b y FIAS, whose last intervention was a “Diagnostic Update o f the Investment
Environment” completed in April of 3,002. In conjunction with the Center for Exports arid
Investment (CEI) MIGA w i l l work to address several issues confronting the country’s ability to
attract new FDI. If accepted b y C E I and successful, the MIGA technical assistance program w i l l
implement a national investment promotion program that aims to increase the value added and
diversify FDI inflows.
114. WBZ w i l l support the CAS objectives by continuing to include the Dominican Republic in
i t s various learning and capacity development programs. M e r alia, these will include programs
in the areas o f education reform, anti-money laundering, municipal development, health and
population, children and youth in cities, and judicial reform. Whereas support in most o f the
above-mentioned areas w i l l be mainly through inclusion o f participants from the Dominican
Republic in regional or global programs, WBI w i l l provide country-specific support in the area
o f improving governance, including control o f corruption and enhancing transparency.
Whenever possible, WBI w i l l link these learning programs to projects and/or AAA activities. In
addition to delivery o f learning activities, WBI w i l l continue to support the Dominican
Republic’s GDLN Center through i t s GDLN Services Unit.

Program Monitoring and Risks
115. CAS Monitoring. The CAS monitoring w i l l track whether the overall Bank supported
program i s contributing to development progress. Complementing the outcome monitoring i s the
input and output tracking which i s part o f regular project implementation and monitoring. A
preliminary monitoring framework i s provided in Annex F. Given that this i s not a results-based
CAS, the presented framework w i l l be revisited and improved upon throughout the CAS period
and an updated version presented in the C A S Progress report in FY08. T o this end, during the
next two years a special effort w i l l be made t o define further the benchmarks and milestones and
specify additional indicators to measure the outcome o f the program in the outer years o f this
CAS.
36

116. The CAS monitoring framework in Annex F l i s t s a selection o f intermediate indicators that
w i l l track progress during the four years o f the CAS. They w i l l track changes in the governance
climate and the public sector as well as signal progress that can be reasonably attributed to World
Bank Group support in these and the Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 areas (economic stability,
competitiveness, and economic growth, and social equity, human development and delivery o f
basic services respectively). These indicators are not meant to monitor the longer-term
overarching goals o f economic and social development and poverty reduction. For example, the
intermediate indicators o f steady ‘improvements in the energy sector cash recovery index’ and
‘timely payment b y Government o f i t s monthly energy bill’ w i l l contribute to stabilize the
macroeconomy, improve competitiveness and stimulate economic growth. The understanding i s
that this w i l l catalyze economic development. Similarly, the intermediate indicator ‘reduction in
proportion o f poor households that are undocumented’, w i l l increase social equity and inclusion.
The understanding here i s that this w i l l reduce inequality and poverty.
117. Some o f the lending instruments w i l l affect more than one outcome but have only been
listed under one outcome. For example, an improvement in water and sanitation and better
management o f solid waste w i l l positively impact both the tourism sector, i.e., competitiveness
and economic growth, and the environment and health o f surrounding communities. Similarly,
implementation o f the government’s public procurement strategy w i l l positively affect all
projects.

118. The CAS monitoring framework has been broadly discussed with Government and other
development partners. O N A P L A N w i l l be in charge o f program monitoring. In this effort they
w i l l rely on both project specific monitoring arrangements and the National Statistics Office
(ONE). O N A P L A N i s working to introduce results-based planning and monitoring systems and
has requested Bank assistance in this regard, possibly as part o f the proposed institutional
strengthening TA loan. Ensuring that O N A P L A N and O N E and related agencies have the
required capacity and take action to monitor these and other indicators w i l l be key to tracking
development progress during the CAS period.
119. Throughout the CAS program, building on the positive experience so far with c i v i l society
monitoring in the Dominican Republic, a pronounced effort w i l l be made to directly involve
representatives o f those who are affected b y the projects in monitoring. Involving c i v i l society in
monitoring i s desirable as i t brings information on Government finance and actions into the
public domain and contributes to increased transparency and accountability.
120. ZBRD Exposure. IBRD exposure and risk indicators w i l l increase over the CAS period
(see Table 8). Whereas total external debt has increased sharply f r o m 19 percent o f GDP in 2000
to 36.6 percent in 2003, IBRD debt increased only modestly from US$292 million to US$347
million (an increase equivalent to 0.6 percent o f GDP). And while interest payments on external
public debt almost doubled f r o m 1 percent o f GDP in 2000-2002 to nearly 2 percent in 2003,
IBRD interest remained constant. Although this CAS program has a smaller annual envelope
than the 1999 CAS and the CAS Progress Report, the Bank’s exposure in the Dominican
Republic i s projected to reach US$542 million in 2006 and US$726 million by 2009 (under the
proposed high case lending scenario contained in this CAS). Nevertheless, IBRD debt service i s
projected to remain between 4 and 7 percent o f total external public debt service and less than 1
percent o f total exports.

37

Table 8: IBRD Lending and Exposure Indicators
Commitments
US$ millions:

Commitments

s

Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net disbursements

I

Interest payments

Net transfers

IBRD debt outstanding

I
20011

IBRD DSlExports
Pref. creditor DS/External Public DS

20021

I

Proiected

20031

20041

20051

20061

42

30

120

150

60

20071

20081

2009

80

80

70

8

25

39

49

51

31

66

168

80

93

130

85

21

23

25

33

37

45

31

38

43

43

18

26

32

-2

29

124

43

55

87

42

22

23

22

21

21

20

26

30

36

42

-5

2

10

-23

8

104

17

25

51

0

292

311

349

341

316

500

542

597

684

126

ercentages:

IBRD DS/Extemal Public DS

I

Actual

20001

9.2

8.1

5.3

6.3

6.6

4.9

3.9

5.6

6.6

6.6

0.4
26.4

0.4
24.5

0.4
40.5

0.5
28.3

0.5
28.0

0.5
28.6

0.5
21.1

0.5
33.6

0.6
40.0

0.6
44.5

under the current CAS. The energy sector’s impact on the macroeconomic stabilization program
and the government’s firm commitment to stay the course on this program signal that the
environment i s ripe for reform in the sector.
125. Implementation risks include the scaling up o f the Water and Sanitation LIL, which
although i t has made significant improvement in the past few months, i s currently rated
unsatisfactory, and another program, the Irrigated Land and Watershed Management that has
recently closed with a record o f poor performance. Careful measures w i l l be applied to learn the
lessons from these experiences. In the case o f the LIL, the new project w i l l benefit from the
existing high level o f political ownership, largely absent under the previous administration. In
the case of the Irrigation Land and Watershed Management Project, new interventions would
build on the very successful experience o f the community-driven pilot component.

Country Financing Parameters
126. The Country Financing Parameters for the Dominican Republic have been discussed with
the Government, who has welcomed the increased flexibility (see Annex D). Government
resources (taxes, revenues and domestic borrowing) represent about two-thirds o f the total
budget and about a third o f the development budget. The Bank’s base case scenario for the
period 2006-2009 represents lending o f up to US$65 million a year, or less than 0.5 percent o f
GDP and 1.5 percent o f i t s total budget. Bank’s investment financing accounts for a mere 4
percent o f the Dominican Republic’s capital budget. As highlighted b y the recently completed
PER and CFAA-CPAR, the Dominican Republic has a relatively well-developed system o f
budget formulation, including some more sophisticated features that are not generally found in
the public expenditure systems o f middle-income countries. However, i t lacks some o f the
substantive aspects o f budget preparation and implementation that would help inform policymakers, support better policy choices and increase the effectiveness o f public spending. Bankfinanced investment projects are integrated into the national budget. Traditionally, the
Dominican budget authorities earmarked resources to projects in the yearly national budgets,
either directly or as part o f the budgets o f the corresponding line ministries. However, this has
not guaranteed that funds be disbursed in full or on a timely basis. Indeed, projects have often
suffered from inadequate and untimely allocation o f counterpart funds, as resources in the
budget, b y definition fungible, were diverted to alternative uses. With the 2005 budget, the
Dominican authorities made a considerable effort to guarantee that adequate counterpart funds be
allocated and disbursed to development projects financed b y multilateral institutions. In
addition, the current administration has been advancing steadily at modernizing budget
procedures with the objective o f moving towards a results and efficiency-based budget process
as early as 2006. This i s a good start. However, the reform process needs further strengthening;
this, in turn, would reduce untimely and inadequate disbursements o f counterpart funds and
diversion o f funds to alternative uses. In this respect, building on the conclusions and
recommendations of the PER and CFAA-CPAR, the W o r l d Bank and the IDB w i l l increase their
active collaboration with the governmental authorities b y stepping up their efforts to modernize
the Dominican fiduciary sector, with a particular emphasis on the preparation, implementation
and monitoring o f public expenditures as captured in the yearly national budget (see paragraphs
45’46, 82).
127. Cost sharing. Until now, the Bank’s aggregate financing share for investment projects in
the Dominican Republic could not exceed 60 percent, applied on a rolling three-year basis. In
the upcoming CAS period, the Government and the Bank have agreed on the limit o f the Bank’s
financing share as 90 percent of project costs, and i t i s expected that the Banks average
financing share w i l l increase from previous levels. This increase in the average cost share i s

39

mainly justified b y the need to support the country’s efforts to emerge from the crises, as well as
to reflect a lack o f counterpart availability due to constrained budgets in the near term. Borrower
commitment and ownership of activities financed b y the Bank would continue to be a central
aspect o f the Bank’s program with the country. Experience to date across the portfolio indicates
that the size o f the counterpart share of investment projects has not influenced government’s
ownership and commitment. Nonetheless, given remaining current issues related to budget
reform, the Government expects to contribute a minimum o f 10 percent o f project costs until
these issues are adequately addressed. As budget mechanisms improve and a track record o f
adequate and timely allocation o f counterpart funds i s established, the limit on the Bank’s
financing share may be increased to 100 percent o f total project costs to provide additional
flexibility to the Government. As discussed above (paragraph 109), satisfactory portfolio
performance i s one o f the triggers for the base case Bank lending program. Compared to the
previous CAS, the total envelope for investment projects proposed for the period 2006-2009 i s
lower and includes fewer projects o f smaller amount. This would allow for a higher share of
Bank financing. At the project level, Bank’s financing share i s expected to be up to 90 percent in
the social sectors (health, education, social protection), given the need to preserve key social
expenditures in the national budget, as they are often neglected or reduced to the minimum,
particularly in period o f economic crisis. Conversely, Bank’s financing share i s expected to be
lower in infrastructure projects. The increased flexibility w i l l better support the Government in
implementing the country’s development agenda. Increased flexibility w i l l also remove several
implementation constraints throughout the projects’ life cycles, as the Government and the Bank
would determine the most appropriate cost sharing ratios for projects. This would also allow for
more efficient project administration. Indeed, with the phasing out o f the traditional pari passu
approach, cost sharing needs w i l l not be determined at the level o f individual expenditures.
Finally, this would enable project teams to focus more on technical aspects o f projects rather
than on financing categories.
128. Recurrent Cost Financing. At present, only a few Bank projects in the Dominican
Republic involve some recurrent cost financing, ranging f r o m 1.4 percent to 16.6 percent o f the
loan amount. These include costs related to project administration (vehicles, fuel, and satellite
connection), textbooks, and salaries for medical staff and researchers, etc. Given the nature o f
projects in the proposed lending pipeline, recurrent cost financing i s expected to remain within
the current range. Recurrent cost financing would be done within the overall framework o f the
Government’s prudent fiscal stance, as evidenced b y the Stand-By Arrangement signed with the
IMF. I t i s also expected that improved budget procedures w i l l soon enable the Government to
undertake systematic calculations o f the recurrent costs during project implementation periods
and beyond. In general, the Government has established a good track record o f sustainability and
in budgeting adequate funds for recurrent costs after Bank financing i s exhausted.22 No country
limit o f Bank-financing for recurrent costs i s proposed. In determining recurrent cost financing
in individual projects, the Bank would take into consideration sustainability issues at the sector
and project levels.
129. Local Cost Financing. For the fiscal years 02-04, financing o f local costs has represented
67 percent, 66 percent, and 68 percent respectively o f investment lending disbursements. The

The only exception i s represented b y the recently closed Ln. 4127 DO - National Highways. In this particular
case, scarcity o f resources, among other things, has made i t difficult for the Government, particularly in a period o f
economic crisis, to guarantee adequate budgetary and institutional support, by means o f a road maintenance fund
and management unit aimed at maintaining the new and reconstructed infrastructure.

22

40

current and proposed portfolios are concentrated in sectors such as education, health, public
administration, and basic infrastructure, where local expenditures represent a large share o f
project resources, and in general, bigger than the share consumed b y foreign expenditures. Going
forward, a similar share o f local cost (Le. about two-thirds of total investment lending) i s
expected. For this reason, i t i s recommended that the Bank finance local costs. In addition, as the
country works to emerge from the recent crises, domestic resources are clearly insufficient to
cover the country’s annual development budget and to meet counterpart financing requirements.
With an overall budget financing gap o f about US$960 million for 2005 and 2006 and tight
l i m i t s for spending on goods and services (although social spending i s projected to increase in
real terms), external funding w i l l be needed to guarantee the implementation o f critical programs
supporting the country’s developmental agenda. The two criteria for Bank financing o f local
costs are met. Consequently, Bank financing o f local and foreign costs in any proportion required
b y individual projects i s proposed.
130. Taxes and Duties. The Dominican Republic has a tradition o f l o w taxes as measured b y
the ratio o f tax revenues to GDP. In 2004, this ratio was 14.8 percent. The tax system relies
heavily on indirect taxation. The following i s a description o f the main taxes levied in the
country:
( i ) Revenues from Personal Zncome Taxes represented 1.5 percent o f GDP (10 percent o f
total tax revenues) in 2004, with formal sector employees accounting for over 90 percent.
The rest comes from self-employed contributors. There are four annual income brackets:
(i)income up to and including RD$120,000 i s tax exempt; (ii)income between
RD$120,000 and RD$200,000 (inclusive) i s taxed at a marginal rate o f 15 percent; (iii)
income between RD$200,000 and RD$300,000 (inclusive) i s taxed at a marginal rate o f
20 percent; and income above RD$300,000 i s taxed at a marginal rate o f 25 percent.
( i i ) Corporate Zncome Taxes amounted to 1.6 percent o f GDP (10 percent o f total tax
revenues) in 2004.
Corporate income taxes include four categories: taxes on
corporations, taxes on telephone companies, and two relatively low-yield taxes o n casino
and racetracks. Corporations are subject to a tax o f 25 percent on their net income.
( i i i ) Property Tax revenues amounted to 0.2 percent o f GDP in 2004 (1.6 percent o f total
tax revenues). Property taxes are levied on real estate operations, vehicle registrations,
inheritance and business registrations. The bulk o f revenues come from taxes on real
estate transactions, including transfer o f property, land registration and house tax.
(iv) Value Added Taxes (VAT) o f 16 percent are imposed on the sale o f products and
services, but are subject to a lengthy l i s t o f scheduled exemptions (on 382 products) and
discretionary exonerations. The VAT was increased f r o m 12 to 16 percent in October

2004 as a consequence o f the fiscal adjustments envisaged to stabilize the country’s
macroeconomic framework. In 2004, the VAT yielded 3.9 percent o f GDP.

( v ) Excise Taxes amounted to 2.6 percent o f GDP in 2004, a substantial portion o f the
total tax revenues. They apply to particular consumption goods, primarily alcohol,
tobacco, oil, cars, and jewelry, inter alia, and range from 0-80 percent, with rates for
alcohol and tobacco falling between 25 and 50 percent. The highest rates apply to luxury
vehicles. Excise taxes do not represent a material amount since most items that carry
excise tax are not eligible under project financing.
(vi) Trade Taxes consist o f import duties, a foreign exchange commission, an export tax,

and a tourist departure tax.

They represent an important source o f budget revenues,
41

although their weight i s expected to decline progressively as a result o f impending trade
liberalization. Import duties represent approximately 2.5 percent o f GDP (including
revenue f r o m the supplemental 2 percent import tax that was eliminated on January 1,
2005). The current tariff structure encompasses three main categories: final products
taxed at an average 14 percent; intermediate goods taxed at an average 7 percent; and raw
materials taxed at 6 percent (based on 2001 data). Some 25 products, mainly vehicles,
have a 40 percent tariff. The overall average weighted tariff was 9.3 percent in 2001. The
commission on foreign exchange generated revenues equal to 1.9 percent o f GDP in
2004. The commission was raised from 10 to 13 percent on January 1, 2005, to help offset the anticipated decline in tariff revenue. The commission i s scheduled to be phased
out in the coming years under the Stand-By Arrangement. The 5 percent flat tax on exports
was eliminated in mid-2004, but generated revenue o f 0.2 percent o f GDP in the first 6
months o f 2004. The tourist departure tax yielded another 0.4 percent o f GDP.
131. The taxes in the Dominican Republic are applied to projects at the same rate as the rest o f
the country. The Dominican tax system i s generally inefficient, marred b y high levels o f tax
evasion and a wide array o f tax exemptions and exonerations. As part o f the economic
stabilization package negotiated with the IMF, the Dominican Government i s committed to a
carefully sequenced reform aimed at simplifying the tax system and broadening the tax base,
which w i l l strengthen revenues over the medium term. Based on the analysis o f the country’s
fiscal regime and the promising steps made by the Government toward modernizing it, the Bank
may finance all taxes and duties associated with i t s projects. At the project level, the Bank w i l l
consider whether taxes and duties constitute an excessively high share o f project expenditures.

VIII. Participatory CAS Process
132. The preparation o f the Dominican Republic CAS benefited from extensive consultations
with government officials, members o f Congress, c i v i l society including youth groups, and
private sector representatives, as well as with donor agencies and academia. These consultations
provided an opportunity to: (i)
stimulate a debate around the country’s challenges and the role o f
the World Bank Group in helping the country address them; and (ii)
create knowledge and
ownership o f the CAS to enhance i t s impact. They also served to inform the public on the W o r l d
Bank Group mission and services.

133. The consultation process included ad-hoc dissemination events for World Bank reports,
and larger meetings focusing on the proposed CAS strategy. As a first step, the Dominican
Republic country team disseminated a set o f policy notes that were prepared for the new
administration, pulling together findings and recommendations o f past World Bank Group
studies and experiences in the Dominican Republic. This dialogue continued with the
Encerrona, a high-level policy dialogue on the country’s key development issues held on
October 23, 2004 with the Government, the IDB, the IMF and the W o r l d Bank. At the same
time, the Bank held discussions with Government officials o n the occasion o f the dissemination
o f the Public Expenditure Review and the Fiduciary Report in November 2004, and o f reports on
trade and labor and agriculture competitiveness in February and March 2005. In addition, the
CAS team has repeatedly met with several key governmental officials, such as the Technical
Secretary o f the Office o f the President and the Director o f the National Planning Office
(ONAPLAN), and discussed the general thrust o f the assistance strategy based on the
government’s policy and program priorities. Their views and recommendations are included in
this CAS.
42

134. Nationwide consultations with other actors, mostly c i v i l society and donor representatives,
took place during the month of January in Santiago and Santo Doming0 and were coordinated b y
a local and well respected university through i t s Center for Governance Studies. A specific
effort was made to reach organizations representing most o f the country’s provinces, vulnerable
groups, youth, women, and immigrants. A specific workshop targeting youth leaders, age 18-21
years old, representing poor rural, urban and tourism areas, including bateyes, was held with the
support o f three leading Dominican NGOs.
135. The consultation process highlighted a consistent and unequivocal support for the proposed
Country Assistance Strategy, i t s overarching objectives o f strengthening governance (particularly
transparency, accountability, and anti-corruption), and its articulation into two pillars (See Annex
E). The consultations endorsed the Bank’s proposal to accompany the government in the reform
o f the energy sector, while working to address the impact o f the crises on the poor and share
equitably the benefits o f future growth. However, participants flagged their increasing concerns
for the structural changes within the labor market stemming from the DR-CAFTA, the uncertain
future o f many FTZs and the inevitable impact on employment, particularly o f young people and
women. In this respect, i t was recommend that the World Bank Group look more closely at
SMEs, traditionally a source of employment for vulnerable groups, and increase the inclusion of
members o f these groups in the education sector in order to better prepare the young for labormarket entry. The consultations also highlighted the importance o f working w i t h local
governments and municipalities and strengthen their capacity to serve effectively and efficiently
their constituents. Based on the participants’ unanimous request to be consulted up-front and
involved in monitoring, follow-up consultations w i l l be organized after the Board discussion of
this CAS and during the implementation o f the CAS.
136. A Dominican Republic Client Survey was carried out in December 2004 and January 2005
to inform CAS preparation and understand stakeholders overall impression o f the Bank in the
country, i t s work, and communications and outreach strategy.32 The survey findings suggest that
the Bank i s trusted and valued b y stakeholders in the country (more so than in most other Latin
American countries). Stakeholders are very positive about their relationship with the Bank and
see a clear role for the Bank in the Dominican development process. The main three areas where
respondents felt the Bank should be involved are: anti-corruption, education, and poverty
reduction. One third o f the respondents believe the Bank should focus i t s resources on the
energy sector. These findings mean that this CAS w i l l indeed address key concerns of
Dominican society. I t i s noteworthy that the largest gaps between areas considered important for
Bank involvement and Bank effectiveness relate to these high priority areas, i.e., corruption, the
energy sector, and poverty reduction. This raises questions for follow up such as which criteria
are stakeholders using to evaluate the bank’s work in these areas; what are the information
sources for these views, and so on.
137. In terms o f outreach, the Dominican written media was the most frequently used source of
information about the Bank. NGOs and bilateral and multi-lateral organization also use the web.
I t i s clear that the Bank’s communications and outreach strategy in the country has to have a
strong emphasis on the press.

32 An independent private sector firm was contracted to distribute the survey, follow up on responses, and coordinate
in-depth interviews on key issues related to the CAS. They survey was distributed to 374 stakeholders from the
Office o f the President, central and local government, bilateral and multi-lateral agency staff, private sector
organizations, NGOs, the media, academia, trade unions, independent government institutions, and the judiciary. A
total o f 21 8 responses (58%) were received.

43

Annex A2
Dominican Republic

Dominican America
Republic & Carib.

POVERTY AND SOCIAL

2002
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
Average annual growth, 1996-02
Population (a)
Labor force (70)

LowerMiddleIncome

8.6
2,320
20.9

527
3,280
1,727

2,411
1,390
3,352

1.7
2.4

1.5
2.2

1.o
1.2

Development diamond'

Life expectancy

-

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1996-02)

76
71
27
9
86
11
130
131
128

49
69
30
I1
81
13
111
111
1I O

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS AND LONG-TERM TRENDS
1982
1992

2001

2002

8.0

8.8

21.3

21.4

20.0
14.3
15.1
14.4
-5.5
1.6
31.6
34.5

22.6
26.2
10.9
16.7
-6.6
1.4
52.3
12.6

23.1
23.9
15.2
19.4
-3.4
1.1
23.9
8.2
22.8
63.9

23.1
25.9
14.6
19.5
-3.8
1.3
26.6
12.0

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

2002-06

2.8
0.8
9.4

6.2
4.5
6.6

2.9
1.2
-6.3

4.1
2.4
-1.7

2.2
0.5
4.6

1982

1992

2001

2002

Agnculture
Industry
Manufactunng
Service5

17 7
28 6
18 3
53 7

13 6
31 8
18 9
54 6

11 4
33 2
16 2
55 4

Private consumption
General government conwmption
Import\ of goods and services

75 2
98
19 2

86 0
31
37 8

76 8
79
32 1

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

-0.1
4.9
4.0
2.6

4.1
7.2
4.5
6.4

4.9
0.1
-1.3
4.8

2.5
3.7
4.0
4.7

Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Gross national product

3.8
-7.1
5.1
10.0
2.7

5.7
17.1
6.6
6.3
6.5

2.0
14.7
5.2
-7.0
2.8

0.7
16.4
15.4
3.0

GDP (USS billions)
Gross domestic investmentfGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savingsiGDP
Current account balanceiGDP
Interest oavmentsiGDP
Total debtfGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debtfGDP
Present value of debtfexports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Expons of goods and services

(7c c$GDPJ

t-

per
capita

Gross
primary

enroilment

I

Access to improved water source

*---%*DominicanRepublic
Lower-middle-incomegroup

1

Economic ratios'

I

Trade

1

Indebtedness
s

STRUCTURE OF THE ECONOMY

-

GNi

29
67
67
41
5
86
16
124
126
122

Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortalitv ioer 1.000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source ('3% of population)
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

'-Dominican Republic
Lower-middle-incomegroup

GDi

-O-GDP

(average annual growth)

-10 1

'-*"-Exports

IlO'lmpoils

Note: 2002 data are preliminary estimater.
This table wah produced from the DeveloDment Economics central database.
* The diamonds shuw four kev indicators in the countw (in bold) compared with its income-grow aveiace. It' data are missing. the diamond w i l l be incomolete.

Annex A2
Dominican Republic
Country at a glance

-

Page 2 of 2

Annex A 2 (Continued) Dominican Republic at a Glance
PRICES AND GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1982

1992

2001

2002

7.5
7.9

53.9
8.3

8.9
8.4

5.2
6.4

..

..
..

15.0
8.3
1.2

16.5
3.9
-1.9

16.7
4.6
-2.2

1982

1992

2001

2002

..

1,105
96
32
678
2,785

2.338

Domestic prices
(% c h a n p )
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

Governmentfinance
('5% otGDP, includes current aranrsl
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall sumlus/deficit

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exuorts (Merchandise)
Raw sugar
Raw cocoa
Manufactures
Total imports (Merchandise)
Food
Fuel and energy

Capital goods

BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

..

507
497

2.486
65
38
1,691
5,937
356
1,240
1,285

..
..

__

..
..

..

11

1992

2001

2002

1,142

2,354

5,485

5,183

Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1,535
-393

3,401
-1,048

7,232
-1.747

7,521
-2,338

Net income
Net current transfers

-254
205

-432
898

.1,119
2.1 I 4

-1.209
2.330

Current account balance

-442

-582

-752

-807

Financing items (net)

295

608

1,271

282

Changes in net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

147

-26

-519

5 84

..
1.0

490
12.8

1,341
16.9

632
18.6

1992

2001

2002

4.6 13
255
19

5.093
317
13

5,693
350
13

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

396
10
0

346
44

62 1
46

914
46

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

9
288
-12
-1
0

23
-9
-19
180
0

44
-55
530
1,079
113

0
-84.9
463
961
10

25
25
2
23
8
14

79
35
25
10
19
-10

25
49
24
25
23
2

42
51
24
33
22
11

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

1

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics central database

0

I

1997

20w

1990

1998
?**

* *aGDP Deflator

2001

-0-CPI

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

I

1982

1

infiation

6,237

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services

EXTERNAL DEBT AND RESOURCE FLOWS
1982
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
2,521
IBRD
116
IDA
22

1

1991

1

tom

2ow

,099

E1Expoos

zw2

2w,

Elmports

Current Account Balance (US$ million)

A317

B 13

1

A . IBRD
0 . IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E. Bilateral

F .Private
G - Shoo-lerm

xi02

b
C

a

3
rJ
4
0
0

t:
*
3

Fc

C

531 .

H

c

0
m

z

L

OK

E:

a

.

.

.

.

.

.

rcl

0

..

9s
E

.C

Y

E

0

u,

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

In

Lc

0

m
e,

2

a

Y

h

0

8

L4
v)

M
h

M

E:

a

h

Y
E

Y

3i
W

3

Y

v)

.3

r/i

4

i?

Y

C
S

s

5

z
E
10

&

0

C
0

1 3

Y

Q

Y

C

3
W

E

Y

3

E

v)

M

E:

a

4
2
4

I.

I.

6141 e

e

e

e

*

e

e

e

Annex B 1
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic and the Millennium Development Goals
Page 1 of 1

Annex B1: Dominican Republic and the Millennium Development Goals

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Population below poverty (%)
Undernourished people (% of total population)
Child malnutrition
Achieve universal primary education
N e t primary enrollment rate (% of 6 to 11 years
old)
Promote gender equality
Ratio of girls to boys for net primary enrollment
Reduce child mortality
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000, 2002)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births, 2002)
Immunization (measles/tuberculosis, % of
children one year old)
Improve maternal health
Maternal mortality (per 100,000 live births,

1985-2002)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%, 19952002)
Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Prevalence of HIV/AIDS (% ages 15-49,2003)
Contraceptive prevalence rate (%, 1995-2002)

Ensure environmental sustainability
Access to an improved water source
(% o f popul., 2000)
Access to improved sanitation
(% o f population, 2000)
Traditional fuel consumption
(% o f energy requir., 2001
Electricity consumption per capita (kilowatt-hours,

2001)

Develop a global partnership for development
Youth unemployment rate (% ages 15-19)
Fixed line-mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
General indicators
Population (millions, 2002)
Annual population growth rate (1 975-2002)
Total fertility rate (births per woman, 200-2005)
L i f e expectancy at birth (years, 2002)
Adult literacy rate (% ages 15 and above, 2002)

Dominican
Republic

LAC

5
25
5

9.5
11

97

__

0.96

__

38
32
92/99

34
27
91/95

230

__

98

83

80

1.7
65

0.7
--

0.7

86

86

82

67

77

61

11.3

21.4

9.3

1,223

1,888

134 1

41
110/207
36.4

1661191
81.2

__

-168/176
59.5

8.6
2.0
2.7
66.7
84.4

1.9
2.5
70.5
88.6

__

-I.4
2.1
70.0
89.7

__

ource: UNDP Human Development Indicator 2004; Encuesta Nacional de Gastos del Hogar, 1998.

Medium- income
countries

-IO

__

37
30
86/87

__

Annex B2
Dominican Republic
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Page 1 of 1

-

C A S Annex B 2 Dominican Republic
Selected Indicators" of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 03/15/2005

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation ' I
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number '"
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount '"
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number "*
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

'

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2002

2003

2004

2005

10
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
30.7

8
3.4
50.0
50.4
50.0
50.4
40.4

10
2.9
20.0
17.7
20.0
17.7
11.5

9
2.9
33.3
54.7
33.3
54.1
8.8

Y
68 1
68

Y
5 82
48

Y
774
70

Y
532
54

Since FY 80

23
706.7
40.9
37.5

Last Five FYs

4
224.9
0.0
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age o f projects in the Banks country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

*

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
A l l indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Dominican Republic
IBRDiIDA Program Summary
Page I of I

CAS Annex B3 - Domican Republic
IBRDlIDA Program Summary
As of March 15,2005
LiSS,Mi

Strriregic Rrtiurds b
(H/M/L)

Implementfltion b

Risk! IH/M/L)

PROPOSED IBRD BASE CASE SCENARIO LENDING PROGRAM"
2006

Institutional Development T A
Social Sector Investment Loan

10 0
50 0

H
H

M
M

2007

Community Development Proyect
Wdter and Sanitation APLl

30 0
20 0

H
H

L
M

20 0

H

PROPOSED GEF PROGRAM
2W6

Biodiversity Conaervation (Las Neblinas)

0.75

H

L

3007

Development of Border Areas
National Pdrk System

10.0
50

H

H

M
M

Public Sector Modemiration
and Competitiveneys DPL

50 0

H

H

Waste Water and Sanitation Investment APL2

50 0

H

H

PROPOSED CARBON FINANCE (CF)

PROPOSED I B R D HIGH CASE LENDI?IG P R O G R A M

2008

300

a. m i s table presents the proposed program for the next four fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whetherthe strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).
Template created on 0412612005.

Annex B3
Dominican Republic
IFC and MIGA Program
Page 1 of 1

-

CAS Annex B3 Dominican Republic
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2002-2005
as of 31/3/2005
2002
2003
IFC commitments (US$m)

80.00

20.00

2004

2005

44.00

75.00

Sector (%)
Accommodation & Tourism
Finance & Insurance
Information
Nonmetallic Minerals
Textiles & Apparel
Transportation and Warehouse
Total

100
63

Total

55
45
100

100

60
100

100
0

100

73

100

100

100

100

FYOl

FY02

FY03

FY04

37
100

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

27
13

81

27

19
0

MIGA
As of end of fiscal year

Finance
Infrastructure
Mining
Oil & Gas
Agri business/Manufacturing/Ser\,ices/Tourism
Total
MIGA's Risk Profile
Transfer Restriction
Expropriation
War & Civil Disturbance
Breach of Contract
MIGA's Gross Exposure in Country
7i Share of MlGA's Gross Exposure
MIGA Net Exposure in Country
% Share of M E A ' S Net Exposure

18.0
105.7
0.0
23.9
33.8
181.4
121.4
165.7
147.7
0.0
181.4
3.3%
123.1

3.9%

FY05

through
1213 112004

0.0
199.0
0.0
10.0
33.8

242.8

0.0
145.3
0.0
6.5
31.9
183.7

0.0
53.0
0.0
6.5
31.8
91.3

0.0
51.8
0.0
0.0
28.9
80.7

182.8
228.9
228.9
0.0
242.8
4.6%
143.3
4.5%

159.1
172.1
171.1
0.0
183.7
3.6%
109.6
3.49

66.7
81.9
80.9
0.0
91.3
1.8%
63.3
1.99

56.1
72.5
71.5
0.0
80.7
1.5%
53.3
1.6%

VY

?
B

9

M

c.,

'E

a2

m

..

U

Ea

!

4

v,

e

Annex 8 6
Dominican Republic
D R Key Economic Indicators
Page 1 of 1

-

Dominican Republic Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
Satiunal accounts (a5 rc of GDP,
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

1997

1998

1W

2002

2Wl

2000

?,GO3

2W5

200-2

2006

2007

2009

2008

I00
12

100
12

100
11

100
11

100
11

100
I2

I00
II

IO0

100

II

100
I1

IO0
11

100
IO

100

IO

33

34

34

34

33

32

31

26

25

25

26

28

28

Industry

10

55

55

55

55

56

56

58

63

64

64

63

62

62

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private invertment

85
20
6
14

86
23
5
18

83
24
6
18

86
24
4
19

85
23
6
17

86
22
7
16

79
23
3
20

80
19
5.0
14

81
20
4.5
15

83
20
4.5
16

84
21
4.6
16

85
21
4.5
17

86
21
4.5
17

Exports (GNFS)b
lmpons (GNFS)

47
52

47
56

46
53

45
55

39
46

38
47

52
54

50
49

39
41

38
42

38
44

39
46

39
46

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

15
19

14
21

17
22

I4
18

15
19

14
19

21
21

20
25

19
22

17
21

16
20

15
19

14
19

15062

15850

17378

19703

2 I603

21595

16541

18673

22926

24234

25046

261 I 7

27486

1800

1850

1950

2130

2300

2420

2130

2060

2070

2310

2530

2600

2670

7.3

8.0

7.3

3.2

4.1

-0.4

2.0

2.5

40

4.5

4.5

4.5

6.2
1.9
1.9

5.5
6.2
7.3

I.5
I.9
0.7

2.4
5.5
5.3

-1.1
1.9
5.0

0.3
-6.0
-3.4

0.8
0.1
-0.7

2.3
4.3
46

2.8
3.9
3.4

2.8
3.8
4.3

2.8
3.4
3.0

Services

Memorandum items
Grosc domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (USS. Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (70,calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
8.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (9%. calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
6.4
5.5
Total consumption
5.6
6.7
Private consumption
6.5
7.0
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions
Change i n reservesd
Memoronduni items
Resource balance ('% of GDP)

7060
1614
7780
6609
-720
1352
-163

7482
4981
8917
7597
-1435
1987
-338

7987
5137
9289
804 1
-1302
1848
-429

8964
5737
10852
9479
-1888
1902
-1027

8387
5276
10063
8779
-1677
2027
-74 I

8236
5165
10151
8838
-1915
2269
-798

8875
547 1
9100
7627
-225
2504
1036

9269
5710
9191
7955
78
2462
1071

9028
5385
9417
8128
-389
2602
463

9176
'315
IO116
8750
-940
2764
-29

9628
5527
10916
9440
-1288
2925
-296

10160
5804
I1904
10282
-1744
3094
-668

10798
6156
12758
1 I007
-1960
3261
-810

421
-32
-90
58
-130
-95

700
0
-26
26
-360
-I

1338
642
54
588
-917
-633

953
I85
-84
269
-195
84

1079
802
-55
857
-616
-525

917
40 1
8
394
-1 160
640

101I
1060
34
IO26
-3359
252

654
244
293
-49
- 1492
-477

769
748
42 1
327
-1837
-143

890
482
572
-91
-1007
-336

933
101
593
-492
-528
-210

1023
I67
704
-537
-211
-31 I

I120
90
685
-594
-42
-357

-4.8

-9.1

-7.5

-9.6

-7.8

-8.9

-1.4

0.4

-1.7

-3.9

-5.1

-6.7

-7.1

-

Dominican Republic Key Economic Indicators

Indicator

1997

Actual
1998
1999

2000

Estimate
2001

2002

2003

2004

Projected
2005
2006

2007

2008

2009

Public finance (as % of GDP at market pr1ces)e
15.9
Current revenues
11.5
Current expenditures
4.5
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
6.1
Capital expenditure
-0.3
Foreign financing

15.8
12.0
3.8
5.5
0.0

15.7
12.9
2.8
6.1
0.8

15.9
13.8
2.1
4.3
0.5

16.4
12.6
3.8
5.8
2.8

16.5
11.9
4.6
7.0
1.1

16.1
11.8
4.3
3.2
5.9

16.1
14.1
2.0
5.0
0.7

17.7
14.2
3.5
4.5
2.0

17.7
12.8
4.9
4.5
0.4

17.8
12.7
5.1
4.6
2.2

17.8
12.7
5.1
4.5
2.9

17.7
12.7
5.0
4.5
2.7

Monetary indicators
M2iGDP
Growth of M 2 (9%)

29.1
24.2

30.1
16.6

32.3
23.7

32.7
17.4

36.6
26.9

51.6
54.5

52.3
28.7

38.2
12.7

41.9
21.0

41.3
14.5

41.3
10.0

41.3
8.7

41.3
7.6

5.4
8.2

8.3
4.9

6.5
6.6

7.7
8.2

8.9
9.7

5.2
5.4

27.4
27.4

51.5
51.2

7.7
1.7

9.8
11.7

6.4
5.2

3.9
4.0

2.9
3.0

Consumer price index (5%- change)
GDP detlator (5% change)

Annex 87
Dominican Republic
DR Key Exposure Indicators
Page 1 of 1

-

Dominican Republic Key Exposure Indicators

1997

Indicator

3509

Total debt outstanding and

1998

1999

2002

2001

?OOO

2005

2004

2003

2006

2009

too8

2DJ7

3541

3371

3507

4105

4643

5872

6438

7408

8093

8116

8091

7925

134

237

311

596

767

1663

365

982

449

83

30

-116

375

378

521

621

659

817

928

1514

2150

1530

1580

1871

disbursed (TDO) (USSm)a
Net disbursements (USSmIa

-I

456

Total debt service (TDS)
lUS$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(0)

TDOiXGSb

42.3

39.4

34.7

32.0

39.2

44.2

52.1

55.0

63.1

66.9

63.3

59.5

54 6

TDOIGDP

23.3

22.3

19.4

17.8

19.0

21.5

35.5

34.5

32.3

33.4

32.4

31.0

28.8

TDSiXGS

5.5

4.2

3.9

4.8

5.9

6.3

7.2

7.9

12.9

17.8

11.9

11.6

12.9

IBRD exposure indicators ('%I
IBRD DSipublic DS

10.4

11.0

10.9

9.2

8.1

5.3

7.5

7.3

5.0

4.2

62

7.5

7.5

Preferred creditor DSipublic

42.1

39.3

34.1

26.4

24.5

40.5

28.3

27.8

28.4

20.9

33.3

39.6

44.1

DS (0)c

0.5

IBRD DS/XGS

209

IBRD TDO (US$m)d

0.4
204

0.4
275

0.4
292

04

317

0.4
350

0.6

0.5

342

317

0.6
489

0.6
562

0.6

0.7

652

773

0.7
837

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio

1%)

IDA TDO (US$m)d

16

15

15

14

13

13

12

II

II

IO

9

36

32

32

28

36

35

77

96

155

n.a

n.a

n.a

n.a

6

6

13

13

16

15

30

39

59

n.a

n.a

n.a

n.a

18

43

152

181

242

184

91

81

n.a

n.a

n.a

n.a

9

8

IFC (USSm)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of I M F credits and net Fhortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements. IFC data for 2005 as of 31/3/2005
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

m

I

B

z*
P
*-

e

c

d

Annex B8
Dominican Republic
IFC Portfolio
Page 1 o f 1

CAS Annex BS (IFC) for Dominican Republic

Dominican Republic
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 15 March, 2005
(InU S Dollars Millions)
Held

FY Approval
1995/96
1998
2000
2000/03
2002
2002
2003
2004
2004
2005
2005
2005

Company
Smith-Enron
Flamenco Bavaro
Rica
Hospiten
CII
OrangeDominicana
Banco BHD
Domicem S.A.
Grupo M
Aerodom
Occidental Hotel
Occidom

Total Portfolio:

Loan

Disbursed

Equity Quasi Partic

0
8.14
0
8
0
44.15
0
24
0
15
0
40

Loan

1.2
2.36
9
9
30
30.9
10
24
20
45
0
10

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
7.7
3
3.16
0
15
10
0
0
0
20
0

1.2
2.36
9
6.75
30
30.9
0
20
12.5
0
0
IO

191.46

0

58.86 139.29 122.71

Equity Quasi Pastic

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
7.7
3
2.41
0
15
10
0
0
0
20
0

0

58.11 118.29

0
8.14
0
6
0
44.15
0
20
0
0
0
40

Annex C
Dominican Republic
Development Objectives o f Projects
Under Implementationat the Time o f the CAS FY05-09
Page 1 o f 2

Annex C Project Development Objectives of Projects
Under Implementation at the Time of the CAS FY05-09
N a m e of Project

HEALTH REFORM
SUPPORT PROJECT
Effective January 2005
US$30 million

F I N A N C I A L SECTOR
TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE L O A N
VAL)
Pending Effectiveness
US$12.5 million

POWER SECTOR
TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE L O A N
Pending Effectiveness
US7.3 million

Project Development Objectives

The project has two main objectives:
1. Contributing to achieve by the year 2015 the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Specifically, the A P L would address three MDG goals: reduce
child mortality, improve maternal health, and contribute to eradicate extreme
poverty by protecting the poorest from financial loss due to illhealth and
disability; and
2. Supporting implementation of the new legal framework for the health sector,
particularly the institutional strengthening of SESPAS in i t s new stewardship role,
the development of insurance mechanisms, and the configuration o f regional
health networks; and supporting preparation, validation and dissemination of
supplementary norms and regulations to the General Health Law (42-01) and the
Social Security Law (87-01)
The project has two main objectives:
1. Strengthening the institutional capacity o f the monetary authorities to improve
the design and implementation of monetary and fiscal policies. The F T A L w i l l
achieve this objective by helping the Central Bank to define a strategy to recapitalize the Central Bank in view o f the large quasi-fiscal deficit it i s incurring
as a result of the banking crisis management; by developing the monetary and
financial regulations to be issued by the Monetary Board required by the recently
approved LMF and; by helping the Ministry o f Finance to implement an efficient
debt management strategy; and
2. Strengthening the institutional capacity o f the financial regulatory agencies to
reduce risks and increase efficiency, transparency and accountability of financial
activities. The FTAL w i l l achieve this objective by strengthening the institutional
capacity of the Banking, Securities, Insurance and Pension superintendencies,
with particular emphasis in the institutional development of the Superintendence
o f Banks and; by modernizing the financial infrastructure, particularly the
country's payments and securities settlement systems.
The project has five objectives:
1. Strengthen the Government's regulatory and consumer protection
performance, by reviewing and correcting problems with the regulatory system
and the institutional structure, and strengthening the Electricity Superintendence
(SIE) and the consumer Protection Office (PROTECOM);
2. Improve policy formulation and implementation by: (a) promoting a national
dialogue to achieve a consensus on required reforms and the participation o f the
private sector; (b) strengthening the National Energy Commission (CNE); (c)
funding public consultation processes; and (d) improving the management o f
government interests as shareholder in power sector enterprises through the
Fondo Patrimonial (FONPER);
3. Design the transmission grid and the wholesale power market, to improve
system reliability and increase competition in the wholesale power market;
4. Increase the quantity and quality o f electricity for the poor, trough rural
electrification programs and by improving the Blackout Reduction Program
(Programa Nacional de Reducci6n de Apagones, PRA) in urban barrios; and

Annex C
Dominican Republic
Development Objectives of Projects
Under Implementation at the Time o f the CAS FY05-09
Page 2 of 2

5. Protect the environment, by analyzing and addressing sectoral environmental
issues.

HIV/AIDS
PREVENTIONAND
CONTROL
PROGRAM
Effective January 2002
US$25 million

EARLY CHILDHOOD
EDUCATION
Effective December
2003
US$42 million

This project assists the Government o f the Dominican Republic in curbing the
spread o f the Human Immune-deficiency (HIV epidemic) through the scaling up
o f programs and activities targeted to high risks groups, expanding awareness
about HIV/acquired Immune-deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) among the general
population; and strengthening the institutional capacity o f COPRESIDA and
community-based organizations to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability o f
the effort.
The development objectives for this project are:
1. T o increase access to early childhood development services for all children
ages zero to five, as measure b y preprimary enrollment rates and the expansion o f
informal services provided by communities and agencies;
2. T o strengthen the quality o f early childhood education that i s available to
children ages zero to five.

Annex D
Dominican Republic
Country Financing Parameters
Page1 of 1

Annex D
DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC
COUNTRY FINANCING
PARAMETERS
Item

Parameter

A. Cost Sharing
Limit on the proportion of
individual project costs that the
Bank mayfinance

Up to 90 percent

B. Recurrent Cost Financing
Any limits that would apply to
the overall amount of recurrent
expenditures that the Bankmay
finance.

No country level
limit

C. Local Cost Financing.Are
the requirements for Bank
financing: (i) financing requirements for the country’s
development program would
exceed the public sector’s own
resources (e.g., from taxation and
other revenues)and expected
domestic borrowing; and (ii) the
financing offoreign expenditures
alone would not enable the Bank
to assistin the financing of

Yes

None
D. Taxes and Duties. Are there
any taxes and duties that the Bank
would not finance?

Explanation/Remarks
The actualcost-sharing would be determined
during thepreparation of each project. In most
projects, the Bank is expected to continue
financing less than90 percent of project costs.
The Bank’s financingshare is expected tobe
higher for social sector projects and lowerfor
infrastructureprojects. As budget mechanisms
improve and atrack record of adequate and
timely allocation of counterpart funds is
established, the Bankmay consider increasing
its financing share upto 100 percent of total
project costs.
Recurrent costs financing associated with Bank
projects is expected tobe modest. In
determining recurrent cost financing
in
individual projects,the Bank would take into
consideration sustainability issues at the sector
and project levels.
The two requirements for Bank financing of
local expenditures are met. Therefore, the Bank
can financelocal costs in the proportions
needed in individual projects.

No taxes or duties are currently identified as
unreasonable ordiscriminatory.At the project
level, the Bank would
consider whether taxes
and duties constitutean excessively high share
of project expenditures.

Annex E
Dominican Republic
CAS Consultations with Dominican Stakeholders
Page 1 of 4

Annex E: CAS Consultations with Dominican Stakeholders
CAS consultations with local stakeholder were held in Santo Doming0 and Santiago on January 14 and
26, 2005 respectively. The World Bank team was headed by Christina Malmberg-Calvo (Country
Manager) and Massimiliano Paolucci (Country Officer) and including Samuel Carlson (Senior HD
Economist), Patricia De L a Fuente Hoyes (Financial Management Specialist), Alejandra D e L a Paz
(Public Information Associate) and Belgica Reyes (Program Assistant).
The consultations were organized with the support o f the Governance Department of INTEC, a local
leading university, and I-Desarrollo, a local consulting firm. Prior to the consultation, INTEC and IDesarrollo conducted a desk review of the positions of the private sector, the civil society and the
government on four key areas for the proposed FY05-09 Country Assistance Strategy: (a) reform o f the
power sector; (b) governance and anti-corruption; competitiveness; and access to and provision of
social services. The objective of the desk review was to identify similarities and differences in the
positions expressed by the different actors on those themes.

The consultations were attended by approximately 110 people representing the Executive Power,
several ministries (such as Education, Health, Women Affairs, and Finance) the Dominican Congress,
the judicial power, local governments, civil society groups, grass root organizations, academia, think
thanks, private sector and cooperation agencies.
The consultations were structured in two segments. The first segment included three power point
presentations on: (a) the World Bank’s mission, structure and products; (‘c) the current and the FY0509 proposed assistance strategies; and (c) the results o f the desk review conducted by INTEC and IDesarrollo. Prior to the consultations, the participants received a short document describing the same
themes in a jargon-free fashion. The second segment implied the constitution of six working groups
who were requested to discuss and provide their views on the proposed World Bank Country Assistance
Strategy for the period 2005-2009, i t s pillars, and proposed areas o f intervention.

The consultations highlighted a solid consensus around the country’s main developmental challenges
and priorities: a consensus already clearly highlighted by the desk review, conducted prior to the
consultations. The priorities are: (a) reform o f the power sector; (b) fight against corruption; (c)
rethinking o f the country’s competitiveness scheme; (d) improvement in the delivery of public services,
particularly health and education. In addition, the participants flagged decentralization as a critical area
for future development. Similarly, the participants confirmed the validity of the proposed World Bank
assistance strategy for the period 2005-2009, both in terms o f lending program and analytical studies.
In addition, they requested that particular attention be devoted b y the World Bank to gender and youth
issues and that adequate monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, including social auditing, be
implemented to guarantee that the proposed strategy and related funds are implemented efficiently and
transparently.
The country’s reform agenda i s tall and the World Bank alone can not respond to the country’s
increased need for support. The participants were emphatic in highlighting the importance of a

Annex E
Dominican Republic
CAS Consultations with Dominican Stakeholders
Page 2 o f 4

concerted effort among govemmental authorities, developmental agencies and the general Dominican
society, whose involvement i s crucial for the sustainability o f any initiative supporting the country’s
long-term development. In particular, the participants flagged the need to involve the members o f both
branches o f Parliament to improve their understanding o f the country’s challenges and, at the same
time, increase the impact o f reforms and funds supporting them.
In addition to the formal consultation process, the World Bank organized a parallel consultation process
with 21 young leaders representing poor urban, rural and tourism areas. The participants showed a
strong concern for the impact o f the economic crisis on the j o b market, which i s unable to create and
maintain jobs for young people, particularly for the less educated ones. This, in turn, provides a
negative incentive for young people, particularly for those living in marginalized rural and urban areas,
to j o i n gangs and live on criminal activities. In light o f this, the participants indicated that the World
Bank should support the country’s efforts to emerge from the crises, given the direct correlation
between sound economic growth and labor creation. In their views, an increased youth participation in
the labor market w i l l also reduce risky behaviors (crime, sexually transmitted diseases, etc.)

The following table summarizes the country’s main priorities as highlighted by the desk review
conducted by INTEC and discussed by the participants to the consultation process.

Annex E
Dominican Republic
CAS Consultations with Dominican Stakeholders
Page 3 of 4

Pillars

Pillar 1:
Stabilizing the
economic
situation,
improving
competitiveness,
and resume
economic
growth

Theme

Electricity
- Sector Financial Sustainability
- Settlement of Debt arrears
- Retargeting subsidies
- Rebalancingtariffs
- National Energy Plan
- Institutional Strengthening of
Supervisory and Policy Making
Institutions
- Private sector participationin
distribution
- Opposition to vertical
integration
- Involvement of consumers in
poor neighborhoods in the
definition of energy plans

Competitiveness
- Improved tax regimes for
FTZs and non-FTZs firms
- Upgrading o f regulations to
meet DR-CAFTA targets
- Streamline business start-up
procedures
- Improve trade facilitation
(particularly ports)
- Improve labor regulations
(fight child labor)
- Implement National
Competitiveness Plan
- Promote national Innovation
system
- Support SMEs
Governance
- Improve budget formulation
and implementation (outputoriented, transparency and
efficiency i n the use o f
budget resources)
- Reduce Presidential
discretion i n use o f public
resources
- Promote e-government
- Approve and implement the
new Procurement Law
- Implementation o f
Integrated Financial Mngt.
System
- Reform ex-ante and ex-post
control system

World
Bank

Private
Sector

X

X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

Annex E
Dominican Republic
CAS Consultations with Dominican Stakeholders
Page 4 of 4

Pillars

Group

Theme

World
Bank

-

Pillar 2:
Achieving
greater social
equity through
human
development
and increased
coverage and
quality o f basic
public services

Boost anti-corruption effort
and strengthen anticorruption bodies
- Implement Civil Service
Career Law
- Consolidate justice reform
- Reform Political Parties
- Reform of all powers,
particularly o f the
Presidency
- Develop social auditing
Social Service Provision
- Higher efficiency in public
expenditure
- Better targeting and delivery
- Increased monitoring
- Increased decentralized
service provision
- Improved statistics, M&E
- Increased participation NGO
participation in poverty
reduction programs
- Focus on rural sector
- Poverty strategy as part o f
National Development
Strategy
Employment generation
.
- Improved macroeconomic
framework as precondition
for more jobs
- Labor Market Modernization
- Improved environment for
SMEs
- Improved links between
education and labor market
- Improve women
participation to the country’s
social and economic l i f e

Youth and crime
Eliminating barriers to entry
for young people i n the job
market
Combat gangs
Fight sexual abuse of children
Increase age o f schooling of
young people
Eradicate social discrimination
and exclusion of young people
living in poor areas
Combat domestic violence
Promote safe sexual behavior

Private
Sector

X

Civil
Society

Government

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

Participants
to CAS
Consultations

Youth
Leaders

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

-;
L

0

C

.-0m

.->

L

a

2

U

9

e,

5

c

i

2

G

3
Y

m
e,
c
a
0
OD

f

3

C

e,
e,

s
!-

3

Y

2
a
m

m

-2
0

P

5

Y

a

P
e,

n
9
3

5
C

0

->
Y

m

3

m

e,
-0
C

m

2

M
.
Y
e

C

c

P

5

Y

m

x

r/:

m

zm

m

u

cd

-c

e,

.-C

a,

2

Q
x.

