Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

REPORT No: 23904 MAS
MEMORANDUM AND RECOMMENDATION
OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION
AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS

Public Disclosure Authorized

April 9, 2002

Country Department 8
Africa Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents mnay not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

MAURITIUS
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Mauritius Rupee (Mau. Rs.)
US$1 = Mau. Rs 30.3 (April 2002)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
FISCAL YEAR
July 1 - June 30
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ACP
AGOA

IMF
IMR
LRT
MFA
MDG
MIGA
MMM

International Monetary Fund
Infant mortality rate
Light railway transit
Multifiber Arrangement
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Mouvement Militant Mauricien

DRS
ESW
EPZ

African Caribbean and Pacific
The African Growth and Opportunity
Act
Country Assistance Strategy
Central Electricity Board
Chlorofluorocarbon
Country procurement assessment
review
Debt reporting system
Economnic and sectoral work
Export processing zones

MSM
MTEF
NEA

FY
EU
GDP
GEF

Fiscal year
European Union
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility

NEAP
NGO
ODA
OECD

GOM
HBS
HCI
HSC
IBRD

Government of Mauritius
Household budget survey
Head Count Index
Higher School Certificate
International Bank of Reconstruction
and Development
Information and Communication
Technology
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation

PER
PERL
PPP
STC
TFP

Mouvement SocialisteMilitant
Medium-term expenditure framework
New Economnic Agenda, or Economic Agenda
for the New Millennium
National Environment Action Plan
Non Governmental Organization
Official Developmental Assistance
Organization of Economic Cooperation and
Development
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Reform Loan
Purchasing power parity
State Trading Corporation
Total factor productivity

U.S.

United States

WTO
VAT

World Trade Organization
Value Added Tax

CAS
CEB
CFC
CPAR

ICT
IDA
IFC

Regional Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager

Mr. Callisto Madavo
Mr. Hafez Ghanem
Mr. Willem van Eeghen

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MAURITIUS
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary ......................................................

I

I. Background ......................................................
What Drove the Diversification of Mauritius' Economy9 ...............................
Economic Developments since the 1997 CAS ...........................................
Mauritius' Progress in Meeting the Millennium Development Goals ...............
Explaining Mauritius' Economic Perfornance ...........................................
Outlook and t,he Emergence of New Challenges and Risks .............................

3
3
6
8
8
9

I1. The Government's Economic Agenda for the New Millennium (NEA) ...............
Competitiveness and Productivity .........................................
Social Development and Cohesion .........................................
The Environment .........................................
Economic Management .........................................
Legal, Constitutional, and Electoral Reform .........................................
Autonomy of Rodrigues .........................................

11
12
13
14
15
15
16

111. World Bank Group Assessment of Mauritius' NEA .....................................
Assessment of the NEA .........................................
Education: The Socioeconomic Rationale for Education Reform .....................
Social Cohesion: Getting a Grip on Inequality ...........................................
Unemployment Could Harm the Social Fabric ...........................................
Following Through on Anticorruption ............................................
Legal Reforms Can Still Go Further .................................................

17
17
17
18
18
19
19

IV. The Experience under the 1997 CAS and the New CAS .............
..................
Bank Group Performance and Experience under previous CAS ......................
The Bank's Existing Portfolio ............................
The New CAS: PERLs and ESW ............................
CAS Scenarios: Base Case and High Case ............................
IBRD Exposure in Mauritius ............................
Role of Other Donors ......................
Risks and Mitigation Measures .28

20
20
21
22
25
26
27

Boxes
Box I
Box 2

Poverty in Mauritius ....................... ,
CAS Consultation Process .23

5

iii

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

Tables
Table 1
Table 2
Table 3
Table 4
Table 5
Table 6
Table 7
Table 8

7
Mauritius: Key Economic Indicators ...............................
Status of Selected MDG Goals in Mauritius .
............................... 8
1997 CAS Activities: Planned and Achieved ............................... 20
21
World Bank Portfolio in Mauritius ...............................
25
Economic and Sector Work, 2002-2004 ...............................
CAS Triggers, 2002-2004 ...............................
26
26
Lending Scenarios ...............................
................. 28
Total Development Assistance, 1999 ..............

Annexes
Annex 1
Annex 2
Annex 3
Annex 4

Policy Matrix
External Financial Requirements and Sources
Summary of Government Finances
Summary of Government Finances (as percentage of GDP)

Annex Al
Annex A2
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8
Annex B8
Annex B1O

Key Economic and Program Indicators-Change from Last CAS
Mauritius at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD/IDA Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Summary of Nonlending Services
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Surnmary of Development Priorities

iv

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.
Mauritius is a development success story. At independence in 1968, the country was
poor, with a nominal per capita of about US$260. Today, nominal income per capita is
US$3,800. Mauritius has turned its ethnic diversity into a major economic asset. The country has
taken judicious advantage of business links throughout the world and preferential access to key
markets. Fueled by booming exports, Mauritius became a middle-income country. It has a stable
government, a reliable and independent judiciary, and well performing public institutions.
However, there remain pockets of poverty. Selected groups have not fully benefited from
Mauritius' strong growth. But the nature and depth of poverty in Mauritius is distinctly less
severe than the poverty levels observed in neighboring African countries. As most of the poor
have access to key social services, the issue in Mauritius is more one of social exclusion than of
abject poverty.
ii.
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was presented to the Board in 1997 (R97-55,
dated April 22, 1997). Since then, Mauritius' economic and social performance has continued to
be among the most impressive in the developing world. Today, the main pillars of the Mauritian
economy are sugar, higher-end textile production and up-scale tourism. The Mauritian
authorities are fully aware that preferential market access will come to an end and the existing
economic base will increasingly be subject to stiffer competition. In response, the Government
has embarked on an ambitious economic program, the New Economic Agenda (NEA), also
referred to as the Economic Agenda for the New Millennium.
iii.
The NEA is expected to advance Mauritius to the next phase of development. Its three
key objectives are to: (i) increase Mauritius' competitiveness; (ii) bring about deeper social
development and social cohesion; and (iii) preserve and protect Mauritius' fragile environment.
The NEA is expected to further diversify the Mauritian economy into a high-skill services sector
endowed with an efficient public sector delivering quality services, and a modem infrastructure
consisting of new public transport systems and state-of-the-art inforrnation technology. The NEA
is also expected to provide more opportunities for those who have not fully benefited from the
country's past economic performance as well as those selected groups who may be negatively
affected by the transformation of the economy. The NEA also provides mechanisms for ensuring
that growth remains sustainable and does not negatively affect Mauritius' fragile natural
environment.
iv.
The most important requirement for the success of the NEA is the expansion of education
with a major increase in its quality. Education is the one area where Mauritius' success does not
measure up to the performance of countries with similar levels of per capita income. Too many
children, especially from poorer families, drop out of school; the quality of schools, the great
majority of which are publicly financed, greatly varies and tends to be biased towards the better
off. Many skills taught at technical schools are of little relevance to the demands of today's labor
market. Mauritius continues to rely on expatriate workers. At the same time, unemployment is
increasing, especially among school leavers. Other development areas that deserve greater focus
include: (i) social programs and their effectiveness; (ii) environmental issues, including the
development of new modes of transport; and (iii) public resource management and the
management of contingent liabilities.

v.
The Government of Mauritius is fully aware of the challenges that it faces in the
implementation of the NEA. It has asked for increased Bank support with changes in the levels
and composition of Bank assistance. In response to the Govermment's request, the Bank has
developed this CAS. It puts greater emphasis on Economic and Sector Work (ESW) that is
tightly linked to the Government's NEA. The ESW will be carried out jointly by a variety of
Mauritian institutions, other donors and the Bank, under all CAS scenarios. The Bank lending
operations under this CAS would consist of PERLs and are designed to fully support the NEA.
The timing of these lending operations will coincide with Mauritius' budget cycle so that
proceeds of World Bank loans are available at the beginning of Mauritius' fiscal year. All
project-specific investment lending will be phased out. The base case of the CAS consists of
financial assistance totaling up to US$80 million for FY02-04. In the high case, the Bank could
lend up to US$120 million for FY02-04. In the low case scenario, Bank assistance will be
restricted to one operation of US$40 million to support the NEA. The success in implementing
policies to support the NEA will determine the volume of the Bank's financial support during the
FY02-04 period. These NEA policies have already been identified by the Government and are
described in the policy matrix attached to this CAS.
vi.
The strategy faces three risks: i) key NEA policy reforms may fall short; (ii) reform
implementation delays occur and efforts fail to bring the education system up to international
levels; and (iii) there is insufficient fiscal adjustment. The CAS describes the Bank's response if
any of these risks materialize.
vii.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
* Does the Board consider that the Bank's strategy adequately addresses the development
issues facing Mauritius ?
*

Does the Board consider the proposed instruments, the emphasis on ESW, and the shift to
PERLs to support Government's NEA appropriate ?

2

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR
RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS
"It is going to be a great achievement if Mauritius can find productive employment for its
population without a serious reduction in the existing standard of living.... The outlook for
peaceful development is poor. " 1
James Meade, Nobel Prize Winner, 1961
I. BACKGROUND
1.
James Meade turned out to be mistaken. Contrary to the predictions of the eminent Nobel
Prize winner, Mauritius became a development success story. Since independence in 1968,
Mauritius has been among the few African countries that have moved decisively to the next stage
of development. Between 1970 and 2000, the annual income of the average Mauritian increased
tenfold in nominal terms, from US$260 to US$3,800, as the economy successfully diversified
away from sugar and into manufacturing and services.
What Drove the Diversification of Mauritius' Economy?
2.
The early 1970s were characterized by bumper sugar harvests. In 1975, cyclone Gervaise
slashed sugar production by 30 percent, but the economy quickly recovered. However, in the
1980s, fundamental disequilibria in the economy became apparent. Cyclone Claudette
exacerbated the underlying weaknesses in the economy, and GDP in 1980 fell by a record 10
percent. To lessen its vulnerability to such shocks, Mauritius started to diversify its economy
Annual GDP growth rates well above five percent became the norm. This growth was
spearheaded by production in the export processing zones (EPZ), a competitive exchange rate
and by savings and investment rates exceeding 20 percent of GDP. Today Mauritius' GDP per
capita is the second highest in Africa. Mauritius' vulnerability to economic shocks has decreased
considerably over the past two decades. Agriculture, which accounted for 23 percent of GDP in
1970, now accounts for only 6 percent, while manufacturing has jumped from 15 to 24 percent of
GDP over the same period.
An Early Realization of the Importance of Exports
3.
Mauritius was the first African country to create EPZs. Unlike later investors in other
African EPZs, most investors in Mauritius' EPZs were nationals. Those Mauritian entrepreneurs,
whose ancestors came from India, France, China and other countries, took advantage of links
with their countries of origin. Exceptional export performance propelled Mauritius to higher
standards of living. On a per capita basis, Mauritius' manufactured exports are more than one
hundred and fifty times that of the average Sub-Saharan African country. Today, Mauritian
exports exceed US$1 billion in industrial and processed products; the median African country
'Meade J.E., and others (1961), "The Economic and Social Structure of Mauritius".

3

exports about US$28 million of similar goods. Mauritian investors have also become important
players in the development of lower end textile production at low labor cost in neighboring
countries.
4.
Throughout the years, Mauritian policymakers have paid special attention to exchange
rate developments, striking a balance between maintaining international competitiveness while
avoiding major shocks and maintaining the type of stability that is valued by international
investors. At the end of January 2002, net international reserves amounted to about seven months
of imports.
Creditworthiness:Among the Best Developing Countries
5.
Mauritius' creditworthiness is underpinned by its strong economic performance over the
last two decades. External and internal debt is at manageable levels. In the World Bank's debt
reporting system, Mauritius is classified as a moderately indebted middle-income country, along
with countries such as Chile, Malaysia, Tunisia, and Uruguay. Mauritius' long-term government
bonds denominated in foreign currency carry a Moody's rating of Baa2, the same as Korea and
Malaysia. Long-term bonds denominated in domestic currency are rated A2, comparable to the
rating for Greece and Poland. Mauritius was one of the few developing countries whose rating
was not revised downward in the wake of the September 11 events.
6.
Total external debt outstanding is currently about US$1.8 billion or about 39 percent of
GDP. Total external debt service payments amount to 7.3 percent of exports of goods and
services. Central Government's external debt represents less than 25 percent of total external
debt. The domestic debt of the central Government represents about 44 percent of GDP. Overall,
and compared with other developing countries, the existing debt of the Mauritian government is
moderate.
Poverty Declined
7.
Since independence, poverty in Mauzitius has dramatically declined. In 1968, most of the
population lived on less than US$1 a day. Today, virtually no Mauritian does. The most recent
poverty line that was used for policy purposes was set at a level well above US$1 a day and was
defined at a monthly income of less than Rs2,228 per adult- about US$116 in real terms or
US$328 in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms (see Box 1). The latest household budget survey
(HBS) of 1996/97 shows that 9.4 percent of adults then lived under this poverty line of Rs2,228
per adult. The GINI coefficient, a common measure of income inequality, 2 has declined from 0.5
in 1962 to 0.42 in 1975, and to 0.39 in 1996/97. However, between 1991/92 and 1996/97,
income equality deteriorated slightly, although the change is not statistically significant.
Nevertheless, the authorities are keenly aware of the potential for social exclusion caused by
deteriorating income distribution. New household data are expected to be available in the fall of
2002, upon completion of the 2001/02 HBS survey.
8.
The quality of Mauritian life has increased across the board; 84 percent of households
have piped water and 99 percent have access to electricity. Improvements in health and
2

GINI= 0 means that everyone has the same income; GINI = 1 means that all income accrues to one person.

4

education indicators are equally impressive. Life expectancy at birth increased from 63 in 1970
to 71 years in 2000. Infant mortality dropped from 64 per 1,000 live births in 1970 to 17 in 1999.
Mauritius is proud of its fairly generous welfare system, which has contributed to maintaining
social cohesion within an ethnically and religiously diverse population.
Box 1. Poverty in Mauritius
Mauritius does not have an official and uniform poverty line, so time trends in poverty are hard to
construct. For practical purposes, the authorities use a poverty line which is set at 50 percent of the
median monthly per capita income The latest Household Budget Survey (HBS) was carried out in
1996/97. A 2001/02 HBS is underway and results are expected in November 2002. Although the
quality of the data is good, their use in designing antipoverty policies is limited. The Government has
asked the Bank for technical assistance in building local capacity to undertake poverty diagnostic
work.
According to the 1996/97 HBS, the median monthly income per adult was Rs4,456 (about US$233 per
month, or US$657 adjusted for PPP). About 9.4 percent of the adult population lives on half this sum
or less, and is considered poor. The additional monthly income the average poor adult would have to
earn was estimated at Rs49 (i.e., an estimated poverty gap of 2.2 percent). Thus the depth of poverty
in Mauritius is relatively low: a total transfer of about 0.9 percent of GDP would be required to lift
every adult in Mauritius out of poverty.
The island of Rodrigues is clearly the poorest region of Mauritius with 37.6 percent of the adult
population considered as poor. Other poor regions include Pamplemousses and Flacq where,
respectively, 10.3 percent and 10.4 percent of the adults live on a monthly income of less than
Rs2,228. The differences in poverty rates across regions suggest that there is scope for geographical
targeting to reach the poor.
Poor families typically have a larger than average family size. School drop-out and repeater rates are
also significantly higher for children from poorer families. The incidence of poverty among singleheaded households is four times higher than the national average. Virtually all of these single parent
households are headed by females, mostly unwed, abandoned, or divorced mothers. These poor
households face significant risks of social exclusion.
Women are Playing A Greater Role
9.
Mauritius has made major progress in enhancing the status of women. A sizable gender
gap in young adult literacy in 1970 has been eliminated. Secondary school and tertiary
enrollment rates are now the same for women as for men. Female labor participation was about
38 percent in 1999. Female representation in the National Legislative Assembly has increased
from zero in 1976 to 10 percent now (6 out of 62 parliamentarians). Similar trends can be
observed in female representation in municipal and village councils.
Awareness of the Importance of Governance
10.
Mauritian policymakers are keenly aware of the importance of good governance. In June
2000, the Economic Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act was passed. An independent
commission against corruption will be established this year, headed by a judge or an individual
5

with the qualifications to hold office as a judge of a supreme court. On governance, the
Government aspires to be at par with OECD countries and the best performing East Asian
countries. The Government has contracted high quality consultants with broad experience to
assist in the promotion of good governance and the fight against corruption. It has also published
a code of good conduct for civil servants addressing issues such as conflict of interest and
potential abuse of power.
Transparency of Decision Making
11.
On the whole, the internal policymaking process is transparent. The press is free and
provides ample space for opposing views. Radio and TV ownership is being diversified.
Decisions made at weekly cabinet meetings and important information reports, including IMF
and World Bank reports, are published on Government websites.
12. There are several fora for discussion and debate with civil society, trade unions, and
employers' federations. These fora include the Mauritius Council of Social Services grouping
Mauritius' most relevant NGOs, the National Trade Unions Confederation, the Federation of
Civil Service Unions, the Joint Economic Council, the Mauritius' Employers' Federation, the
Tripartite Committee on Wage Negotiation, and the newly formed National Economic and Social
Council. The reconstruction in the aftermath of the January 2002 cyclone Dina and the
restoration of key services illustrate the ability of different parts of Mauritian society to work
together and show a sense of national purpose and unity. At the same time, freedom of speech,
the diversity of ownership within the media, a history of religious freedom, and the peaceful
coexistence of groups of very different ethnic backgrounds, education, and religions, are
indications of the depth of Mauritius' democratic foundations.
Economic Developments since the 1997 CAS
13.
Since the last CAS-presented to the Board in April 1997-Mauritius has maintained its
strong economic performance.. GDP growth has remained high, averaging more than 5.4 percent
per year between 1996 and 2000. In FY99/003 , sugar production was seriously affected by a
drought and GDP fell to 2.6 percent. GDP recovered in FYOO/0l: real GDP growth amounted to
7.2 percent, with all sectors recording positive growth. The inflation rate for FYOO/01 decreased
to 4.4 percent-below the target of 5 to 5.5 percent. Exports to the U.S. increased dramatically
prior to the September 11 events as a result of the African Growth and Opportunity Act 2000
(AGOA). The Act offers tangible incentives for African countries to continue their efforts to
open their economies and build free markets.
14. Between 1997 and 2000, personal incomes increased at a pace well above regional
averages. With an average annual population growth rate of 1.2 percent, and in the absence of
major changes in income distribution, poverty declined rapidly. In the year 2000, Mauritius per
capita income of US$ 3,800 was the second highest in Africa. In PPP terms, it was US$9,940 a
level comparable with the richer Latin American countries.

3

The fiscal year starts on July 1. FYOO/0 1 thus covers the period July 1, 2000 through June 30, 2001.

6

15.
External shocks have affected growth for the FY01/02 fiscal year. Since September 11,
export growth to the United States fell and foreign direct investment declined. Furthermore, even
though Mauritius was spared the collapse in tourism experienced elsewhere following the
September 11 event, the sharp increase in the number of tourists, occurring in the first half of
2001, came to an end. In January 2002, Mauritius was hit by Dina, the most severe cyclone
(category 4) in five years causing significant damage.
16.
Considering these shocks, Mauritius' economy is proving to be remarkably resilient: the
economy is projected to grow by about 5.3 percent in real terns in FY01/02. For FY02/03, real
GDP is projected to grow by about 4.6 percent in spite of a reduction in sugar production as a
result of cyclone Dina. Inflation however is expected to edge upward as a result of an increase in
food prices. The budgetary fiscal deficit is expected to remain at about 6.5 percent of GDP for
FY01/02.

Table 1. Mauritius: Key Economic Indicators
Period averages (fiscal years)
1981-85 1986-90 1991-95 1996-00
GDP growth (% per year)
11on-Sugar gr. (CY)
Changes in CPI (avg - % per year)
Per Capita Income (USD)

Estirnates
1999/00 2000/01a

5.1
4.2
7.8
1,130

6.9
8.1
8.3
2,153

5.0
6.1
6.6
3,251

5.4
6.0
6.2
3,770

2.6
5.8
5.3
3,814

Per capita GNP US(PPP)
Literacy rate
Life expectancy
Infant mortality

77
68
25.6

80
70
20.4

82
70
19.6

85
71
18.8

9,940
85
71
18.8

17.0

As percent of GDP
Gross domestic investment
Gross domestic savings

20.7
18.8

28.6
25.3

28.8
24.3

26.2
24.4

25.7
23.7

24.4
25.3

25.1
25.3

Total revenue
Total expenditure
Overall fiscal balance

22.4
29.7
-7.4

23.3
25.1
-1.8

20.1
23.9
-3.6

19.6
24.8
-5.0

20.4
24.6
-3.8

18.3
24.8
-6.6

18.3
24.8
-6.5

External current account balance
Total extemal debtc
Domestic debt (central govt.)

-3.2
52.5
..

-0.6
39.8
27.0

-2.2
37.2
31.8

-0.9
42.4
39.6

-1.6
41.1
41.6

1.8
38.7
43.7

1.7
39.4
44.9

12.7

14.1

..

..

0.6
1117.9

3.2
2227.2

17.1
-1.3
4.3
3527.4

23.9
1.9
3.1
4326.1

25.5
5.8
2.9
4423.8

27.6
2.8
3.3
4500.3

30.4
-3.3
3.8
4537.3

Memo:
Exchange rate (Rupees/US$)
REER (avg annual change) '
Gross foreign reservesd
GDP in $US million

7.2
5.9
4.4
3,800

Projection
2001/02
5.3
5.0
6.0
3,830

85

Notes: (a) Preliminary Estimate; (b) For 1990 only; (c) includes ST debt, about 15 percent of GDP in 00/02;
(d) in months of imports; (e) Real Effective Exchange Rate, "minus" is depreciation; CY denotes calendar years.
Source: Government of Mauritius and Bank/IMF estimates andprojections

7

Mauritius' Progress in Meeting the Millennium Development Goals
17.
Mauritius is among the few countries in Africa that has either met, or is highly likely to
meet all but one of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by the year 2015. Virtually no
one in Mauritius suffers from hunger or lives on less than US$1 a day. The overwhelming
majority of the population has access to safe drinking water. Primary education is universal. One
MDG that Mauritius is unlikely to meet is the reduction by two-thirds of the child mortality rate
(IMR). Mauritius' IMR stands currently at 17 deaths per 1,000 live births. This is below the IMR
in most middle income countries. Bringing the 1IMR down from 17 to 6 (below the level the USA
has today) is considered unlikely given Mauritius' level of income especially in the various
pockets of poverty in selected areas of Mauritius. On the whole, Mauritius' development
challenges go well beyond the reaching of the MDGs and focuses on success fully guiding
Mauritius to the next level of development.
Table 2. Status of Selected MDG Goals in Mauritius

Goal
Eliminate child malnutrition

STATUS

Almost achieved; likely to be fully
achieved by 2015
Achieved
Achieved
Unlikely
Almost done; likely to be fully achieved
by 2015
Achieved

Achieve universal primary education
Achieved gender equality in schools
Reduce child mortality by two thirds
Reduce matemal mortality by three quarters
Maintenance of low HIV/AIDS Prevalence
Ensure environmental sustainability

Likely

Explaining Mauritius' Economic Performance
18.
Between independence and 1990, Mauritius' economic growth was primarily driven by
the accumulation of inputs: the use of more labor and more capital led to higher production. In
the 1990s, however, growth was driven by strong increases in 4 productivity: total factor
productivity (TFP) increased by an average of 1.4 percent per year, and compared favorably
even with increases in TFP of East Asian countries such as Korea and Malaysia.
19.
Mauritius has not always followed orthodox economic policies. While exports clearly
played the major role in the "Mauritian miracle", views differ on the effectiveness of
Government interventions in key markets, such as that for essential commodities and the labor
market. In the EPZs, exporting firms were able to import inputs duty free and benefited from a
variety of tax incentives. However, overall trade practices remained fairly restrictive, 5 and only
recently have trade policies become more liberal. On balance, however, the Government was
able to manage the effects of the economic incentives. The labor market for the export sector was

measures efficiency in the use of labor and capital. It embodies technical progress, better allocation of
resources, etc.
5 Subramanian and Roy (2001), "Who Can Explain the Mauritian Miracle: Meade, Romer, Sachs, or Rodrik?" IMF
Working Paper.
4TFP

8

effectively segmented from the rest of the economy, and exporting firms were able to flexibly
expand or reduce the labor force in response to changing market conditions.
20.
A key factor in explaining Mauritius' success seems to be its judicious use of preferential
trade agreements; most notably, the country has taken advantage of guaranteed sugar exports to
the European Union and preferential access to consumer markets for exports of textiles and
clothing under the Multifiber Agreement (MFA). Rents accruing to Mauritius as a result of these
preferential trade agreements are estimated to be about 4.5 percent of GDP in the 1990s. The
very fact that Mauritius was, and still is, able to take advantage of these opportunities points to
the strength of its institutions. Government, entrepreneurs, and workers worked together, and
differences were not used as sources of division but as opportunities to develop national welfare.
Outlook and the Emergence of New Challenges and Risks
21.
Overall economic prospects remain good and the immediate economic impact of
September 11 seems to be less severe than originally envisaged. The Government is keenly
aware of the challenges and is taking steps to position the country for entry into its next phase of
development
Challenges
22.
First, the diversification of the country's economic base needs to be further expanded.
Mauritius is a small open country, vulnerable to developments beyond its control. The
remarkable performance in sugar and textiles was based not just on sheer entrepreneurial
competence but also on stable and predictable revenues coming from preferential access to the
European and U.S. markets. However, preferential trade agreements and the resulting
possibilities to indirectly subsidize exporters are gradually being phased out under new WTO
rules. This loss in preferential treatment will be offset by easier market access for Mauritian
exporters, alongside other exporting African countries, under the recently approved AGOA. As a
result of AGOA, trade with the U.S. during the first six months of 2001 was 24 percent higher
than in the first half of 2000. However, this initial spurt of exports emanated from new buyers in
the U.S, and following the September 11 events, orders from new buyers dropped by 50 percent
as they preferred to rely on established lines of supply. Orders remained normal from existing
U.S. buyers already doing business with Mauritius before AGOA. In the medium- to long-run,
Mauritian textile producers will face intensified competition from new low-cost labor garment
producers such as Madagascar (which also benefits greatly from AGOA), China, Vietnam,
Bangladesh, and other Asian countries.
23.
Moreover, the tourism sector could be sensitive to an economic downturn in Europe. So
far, the sector has responded remarkably well to the September 11 events. Tourism capacity is
still being expanded in Mauritius, and further growth is still envisaged. In the long run however,
tourism will face saturation and capacity constraints given the size of the island and its
environmental fragility. Mauritius thus needs to encourage new growth sectors that can move the
country toward its next phase of development.
24.
Second, human capital needs substantial improvement. The prevailing vision among
policymakers in Mauritius is to create a deeply democratic society anchored in a knowledge9

based economy similar to that of Singapore. However, such a strategy crucially depends on
human capital and the quality of the labor force. Mauritius' current labor force is ill-equipped to
match the labor force of knowledge-based societies. On average, a Mauritian worker has had
seven years of education compared to more than ten years for the average worker in Singapore
and nine years in countries, such as China and Korea. Thus the education system has not been
able to keep pace with the requirements of the country's fast growing economy.
25.
In terms of the quality of education, Mauritius also falls short compared to Singapore. A
1999 international student achievement test showed that Singaporean students top the list of 38
participating countries (mainly high-income) for mean achievement scores in mathematics, and
were second (after Taiwan) in science. 6 Mauritius, on the other hand, has not yet participated in
these international student achievement tests, and it is likely that achievement outcomes in
Mauritius will show important gaps compared to countries with similar levels of income.
26.
Moreover, about one third of children, mainly from poorer families, do not make it
beyond the primary level. In some of the poorer regions such as the Black River District and the
island of Rodrigues, the primary school pass rates are as low as 38 percent and 54 percent
respectively. Children from poorer families do not get the academic assistance and the tutoring
required to complete schooling. Unless addressed over a prolonged period of time, the existing
system will contribute to the creation of a class of citizens who are ill-equipped for the 21St
century and run a considerable risk of being unemployed or socially excluded.
27.
Public spending on education in Mauritius increased during the last decade, from about
3 percent of GDP in 1991 to about 4 percent in 1999. However, it remains relatively modest
compared with other upper-middle-income countries where total spending on education (public
and private combined) typically amounts to about 8 percent of GDP. Although education is
nominally free, Mauritians spend a substantial share of their income on private tutoring, which
has become an additional revenue source for teachers. More than 50 percent of Mauritian
households reported monthly expenditures on private tutoring.
28.
Third, Government's public finances need to be restructured. The NEA and Mauritius'
vision of moving to the next phase of development entails ambitious plans and large public
investments. The low level of tax revenues combined with increased levels of public spending is
putting pressure on the budget and presents the authorities with difficult choices. Tension is
increasing between, on the one hand, low taxation to encourage private investment, and on the
other, the large public investments planned by the Government. The result is a budgetary deficit
currently around 6.5 percent, as noted above.
29.
At the same time, Mauritius still has a large public enterprises sector that rely on financial
support from the Government. Some-most notably the State Trading Corporation (STC) and
the Central Electricity Board (CEB)-have large debts and had large operating deficits in 2001
when international oil prices were high and domestic prices were not adjusted. The Government
is undertaking a comprehensive overview of its contingent liabilities linked to the Public
Enterprises Sector. Even though oil prices have been brought in line with international prices and
the deficits of CEB and STC have been reduced, it is possible that this review of contingent
6

IEA, TIMSS, Science Achievement in Middle School Years (1999).

10

liabilities will lead to an increase in public debt. To meet the goal of reducing its central
government budget deficit by about one percentage point of GDP per year and bringing it down
to about 3 percent of GDP by FY05/06, the Govemment will need to manage its fiscal policies
carefully by phasing public investments and by taking additional revenue measures.
30.
Government's debt levels are manageable in spite of relatively high fiscal deficit of about
6.5 percent of GDP. With the measures that Government is taking and the expected reduction of
the fiscal deficit, debt levels are expected to remain manageable in the foreseeable future. The
Memorandum of the President on the proposed PERL (Report No. P-7518-MAS) accompanying
this CAS, contains a description of Government's debt strategy under different scenarios . Given
the current macroeconomic outlook, the expenditure and revenue measures currently being
undertaken by Government, central government debt is expected to peak at about 53.7 percent of
GDP in FY03/04 and to decline thereafter. Similarly, central government debt service as a share
of government revenues will increase slightly to about 23 percent by FY04/05, and decline
thereafter. Thus, the implementation of NEA is expected to result in only a temporary increase in
indebtedness. In the event though of low GDP growth rates or disappointing levels of tax
revenues, a further restructuring of public finances will be required. The sensitivity analysis
contained in the proposed PERL illustrates the viability of Government's debt strategy under the
different scenarios but the analysis highlights the need for close monitoring of fiscal policies.
31.
Fourth, social exclusion and poverty remain on the policy agenda, and unemployment is
on the rise. Persistent pockets of poverty continue to exist, especially in Rodrigues, where
income levels and social indicators are below those on the main island. There are also large
important geographical differences in poverty. The existing welfare system is generous but falls
short in protecting the most vulnerable segments of the population and preventing social
exclusion.
32.
Between 1996 and 2000, employment increased by only 10,900 jobs in large enterprises
and by 21,000 jobs in small- and medium-scale enterprises. This increase in employment is
lower than the new demand for jobs; thus, unemployment is rising. At the same time, Mauritius
employs 15,000 expatriate workers (about 3 percent of the total labor force) mainly in the EPZs.
The majority of EPZ workers are women. Migrant EPZ workers are mainly from China, India,
and Sri Lanka. They work long hours and live in quarters provided by their employers. The
minimum wage for women was 30 percent below that of men when EPZs were created in the
1970s, EPZ wages were equalized in the early 1980s. Today, the overall unemployment rate
among women is slightly higher than that for men. In spite of recent progress, only a quarter of
managerial posts are occupied by women.
II. THE GOVERNMENT'S ECONOMIC AGENDA FOR THE
NEW MILLENNIUM (NEA)
33.
Following elections in September 2000, the labor Government that ruled the country
since 1997 was replaced by an alliance of the Mouvement Socialiste Militant (MSM) and the
Mouvement Militant Mauricien (MMM). On February 15, 2002, the president of Mauritius,
Mr. Cassam Uteem, resigned from his post. Mr. Karl Offman was elected by the Mauritius
National Assembly on February 25 to fill the post of president. As part of the agreement between
11

MSM and MMM, the current prime minister, Sir Anerood Jugnauth (leader of the MSM), will
become president within 18 months and will be replaced as Prime minister by Mr. Paul
Berenger, the leader of the MMM.
34.
As soon as the MSM-MMM Government came to power in September 2000, it undertook
an analysis of the challenges facing the Mauritian economy and formulated an Economic Agenda
for the New Millennium (NEA). The NEA aims to transform Mauritius into a high-tech, highincome service and knowledge economy and its key objectives are:
A. Increasing competitiveness and productivity to maintain and increase the high rates of
growth, thus reducing poverty and increasing incomes and social well-being;
B. Bringing about deeper social development and social cohesion through (i) higher
quality education and more equitable access; (ii) social assistance that reaches the poor
more efficiently and is financially sustainable; and (iii) improved and financially
sustainable healthcare; and
C. Preserving and protecting Mauritius'fragile environment to ensure that higher growth
is enviromnentally sustainable.
35.
Substantial progress has been made thus far in the implementation of many policy actions
designed to achieve these objectives. The budget was also realigned to meet strategic priorities,
with expenditures being focused on education, environment, infrastructure, and poverty.
Competitiveness and Productivity
36.
Faced with the need to diversify its economy in order to maintain strong economic
growth, Mauritius has undertaken several concrete actions. The Sugar Industry Efficiency Act
was passed in 2001. Implementation of the Sugar Sector Strategic Plan embodied in the Act was
also started in the same year. In addition to reducing the production costs in the sugar sector, the
Government is promoting a voluntary retirement scheme for sugar-related companies. Around
6,000 to 8,000 workers in the sector-20 to 25 percent of the workforce-will take early
retirement.
37.
The textile sector has been until now one of the country's key sectors under the
preferential trade agreement with the European Union. This will come to an end by December
2004, and an action plan to guide the necessary transition of the sector has been completed. On
tourism, the Government has produced a tourism development plan with a twenty-year vision
and a five-year action program to create the necessary regulatory and institutional framework for
tourism development.
38.
To support the move to a more service based economy, the regulatory framework for the
information and communications technology (ICT) and financial sectors has been overhauled.
The Government is actively seeking foreign investments in the ICT sector by developing a
package of incentives and through the creation of a Cyber City that is expected to be completed
by September 2003. In addition, the Government is actively encouraging international companies

12

to relocate their regional headquarters in Mauritius. Reforms in the financial sector have
accelerated under the Financial Services Development Act 2001, which creates a nonbanking
financial sector regulator covering insurance, the stock market, and pensions. This body, the
Financial Services Commission, is responsible for overseeing all nonbanking financial bodies
and promoting efficiency and transparency and is now operational. In addition, this new
institutional and regulatory framework will harmonize the offshore and onshore sectors,
introduce coherent supervisory standards and promote good governance and investors'
confidence.
39.
To further enhance efficiency and reduce rates for international connectivity,
Government plans to fully liberalize its telecommunication sector by 2003. After considerable
delay, Mauritius' privatization plans got off the ground with the sale of shares for Mauritius
Telecom in November 2000. Radio and TV broadcasting services are also being liberalized.
Strategic partners are being sought for other related public utility enterprises such as the
electricity company.
Social Development and Cohesion
40. The Government is focusing on reforms in four areas critical to promoting social
development and cohesion: (i) education and training; (ii) poverty; (iii) social programs; and
(iv) health.
Education and training
41.
Education is critical not only to support a highly skilled labor force but also as one of the
prime instruments in preventing social exclusion and reducing poverty. Mauritius has been
successful in reaching universal primary education. However, 35 percent of students fail the
primary education completion exam, and at the secondary and tertiary levels, the net enrolment
ratios are significantly lower than required for economic growth. The Government's focus is on
improved quality, efficiency, and equity of access in education and training. An ambitious
reform of the education and training system is being undertaken, including (i) increasing the
number of years of compulsory schooling from six to eleven, (ii) improving equity and cost
efficiency and increasing access at primary and secondary levels, (iii) introducing ICT in primary
and secondary schools, and (iv) improving the quality and relevance of the curricula and
restructuring the examination system. This reform will better enable the Mauritian economy to
adapt to global competition and participate in the e-economy.
42.
Increased public spending on education and training and more private sector involvement
and financing is necessary to implement this ambitious agenda. Government spending on
education amounts to about 4 percent of GDP, which Government realizes is insufficient to
achieve its desired goals. Thus in FY01/02, capital expenditure on education and training
increased by 58 percent. Around Rsl.1 billion (US$36 million) was allocated for FY01/02 for
construction of new secondary schools and a similar amount is planned for FY02/03. School
intake capacity in Rodrigues is expected to double. The Govermnent is aware that the upgrading
of its education system will require sustained effort and increased levels of spending for about

13

five to eight years. Skills will also need to be upgraded to face the challenges of a modem labor
market.
Poverty
43.
The Government is giving top priority to the poverty reduction through the
implementation of the National Action Plan for Poverty Alleviation by a partnership of the
public and private sectors with civil society. In addition, significantly greater public
investment-over one billion rupees in FYO1/02-is being allocated to the island of Rodrigues,
where the poverty head count index is well above the national average. The Government is also
extending existing micro finance schemes to target community development and diversify the
areas of intervention. Lastly, it is undertaking a series of housing improvements for the poorest
segments of the population.
Social programs
44.
Govermment has an array of social assistance programs in place, including flour and rice
subsidies, income support for individuals with special needs, and housing assistance. However,
all these programs need to be more efficiently targeted to the poor. The Government thus plans
to move away from broad categories of social assistance and its beneficiaries and provide
opportunities focused on those of the poor who meet specific qualifications. Mauritius also plans
to modernize its current pension system to ensure its financial viability and equitable
distribution. The goal is to provide adequate care for the poor while offering the better off
opportunities to make voluntary provision for themselves. A comprehensive analysis of the
options for reform has been completed, and a national white paper is under preparation for
national debate.
Health
45.
Mauritius also plans to modernize the provision and financing of health services;
currently it is under great pressure from the demands of a rapidly aging population and the
growing burden of noncommunicable diseases, in particular cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
The Government has commissioned a study on the use of an insurance scheme to finance
incremental high-cost tertiary services while maintaining free basic services. The report is
currently being examined.
The Environment
46. The Government's agenda for the preservation of the environment focuses on solid and
liquid waste management and transport. Government has added Rs600 million (US$19 million)
to its budget to accelerate the installation of sewerage projects or. the island. An additional
40,000 households are expected to be connected to the sewerage network in the coming years.
Government also plans to commission a waste-to-energy incinerator of a capacity of about
150,000 tons/year on a Build-Own-Operate basis. Tenders for the project will be launched this
year. In addition, Government is exploring the possibility of further extending the existing
landfill or establishing a new landfill at an alternative site.

14

47. Government has been seeking an alternative mode of transportation along the Port LouisCurepipe corridor to reduce significantly both congestion and levels of pollution. The most likely
option is a light rail transport system. Further, unleaded petroleum will be introduced as soon as
possible, customs duties on all chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) and ozone-depleting cylinders have
been raised by 40 percent, and duty on ozone-friendly cylinders has been abolished. A national
council is also being created to promote the use of renewable energy and study the feasibility of
windmills.
48. Finally, Government is currently implementing the National Environment Action Plan 2
(NEAP 2). Investments in the areas of biodiversity and coastal zone management as well as land
conservation and management will be made. To improve environmental management, training
and technical assistance will be provided to strengthen policy planning and build institutional
capacity. Training will include environmental impact assessment review and the licensing and
monitoring of mitigation plans.
Economic Management
49. The key to achieving the three objectives of the NEA is sound economic management.
Government recognizes the need to move to multiyear budgeting and introduce clearer links
between development objectives and the budgetary process. The Government has embarked on
reforms aimed at introducing a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) as a first step. The
goal will be to facilitate the achievement of development objectives and guide budget
formulation and budget execution. The MTEF is expected to improve the predictability of
resource flow to the ministries and enhance accountability and service delivery.
50. Government has also announced it would consolidate public finances, publish central
government accounts, wind up off-budget funds associated with the privatization funds, confer
greater independence upon the Bank of Mauritius in the conduct of monetary policy, and
gradually reduce the budget deficit to about 3 percent of GDP by the end of its mandate in
FY05/06. To counteract the decline in tax revenues from 18 percent to 16 percent of GDP that
occurred under the previous government, the new administration announced an increase in the
value-added tax (VAT) from 10 percent to 12 percent and a reduction in tax exemptions. Other
revenue measures designed to increase the tax base are also planned.
Legal, Constitutional, and Electoral Reform
51.
The Mauritian legal and judicial system is sound and effective. Nonetheless, it can be
further improved through modernization and strengthening, particularly in the judiciary.
Mauritius is also keen to improve its political process and plans to undertake electoral reforms.
52.
Mauritian laws are updated continually. To move toward a more high-tech, service based
economy, Mauritius has recently passed wide-ranging legislation to make needed changes in
economic and financial law and address the challenges of terrorism 7.8 The Government places

7 These include the Companies Act 2001, the Trusts Act 2001, the Financial Services Development Act 2001, the
Investment Promotion Act 2001, and the Financial Intelligence Unit Bill 2002.

15

anticorruption and fraud high on its agenda. The Prevention of Corruption Act 2002, recently
approved, seeks to establish an independent commission against corruption to detect and
investigate corruption and money laundering offenses.
The Government appointed an independent commission-the Sachs Commission-in
53.
December 2001 to provide recommendations on legal and constitutional reforms. These
recommendations are currently being reviewed by Govemnment and discussed by the National
Legislative Assembly. There is a consensus that: (i) the dual role of the Supreme Court as the
highest court of first instance in the country and as a court of appeals should be discontinued; (ii)
a separate court of appeals be established; and (iii) both courts should be staffed by different
judges. Thus the terms of reference of the Sachs Commission was "to separate the Appellate
Division of the Supreme Court from other divisions", recommending an appropriate structure.
The proposed reorganization would prevent conflicts of interest, increase expertise, and improve
the working conditions of the judges. The Commission also examined how the quality of the
judicial system could be improved. To strengthen public prosecution, the commission
recommended that a separate department be established to support the director of Public
Prosecutions with a team of professional prosecutors that has the training and experience
necessary to carry out the prosecutor's vital function.
54.
Mauritius also seeks to continue the process of strengthening its democratic system and
modernizing the political process. Thus, the Sachs Commission provided recommendations for
improving the election process and called for a draft bill for public funding of political parties.
The following additional recommendations were made:
a) Presidential discretion in selecting a prime minister from outside the majority party;
b) Proportional representation in the National Legislative Assembly in the selection from
party lists of 30 out of 92 parliamentary representatives; a minimum vote of 10 percent to
be required for representation; selection from the constituencies for the remaining 62
representatives to continue;
c) Increased participation of women in politics;
d) Registration of corporate financing for political parties; higher ceilings for electoral
expenditures by candidates and political groups; and
e) Strengthening of electoral logistics, to include independent setting of the dates for
elections and adoption of a code of behavior for electoral candidates and the media.
Autonomy of Rodrigues
55.
In January 2002, the Rodrigues Regional Assembly and the Amendment to the
Constitution of Mauritius Act came into force. The Act provides for a decentralized form of
government and the establishment of a Rodrigues regional assembly. The regional assembly is
mandated to deal with the administration of Rodrigues and with issues such as the granting of
investment and building permits. It will also have a greater say in the design of the school
curricula to better reflect the history and ethnic origins of the island. In the future, Rodrigues will
be allowed to expand the levying of selected local taxes and decide upon their use. In the
8 The Prevention of Terrorism Bill which has been approved by Parliament, is a direct response to Resolution 1373

of the UN Security Council, of which Mauritius is a member.

16

meantime, however, Rodrigues will continue to rely almost exclusively on transfers from the
Government of Mauritius.
III.WORLD BANK GROUP ASSESSMENT OF MAURITIUS' NEA
Assessment of the NEA
56. The NEA is a sound and bold strategy. The time is ripe to embark on its implementation.
In general, the very high degree of local ownership is the key strength of Mauritius' development
program. Mauritius' reform programs are seldom forced by fiscal or balance of payments crises,
but are self-designed and self-imposed. As a result, program execution mirrors program design to
a very large extent. Mauritius draws expertise from within the country and from a variety of
external sources. The Bank has been asked to assist in the formulation of selected sector plans,
but is by no means the sole advisor in any sector.
57. Government is fully aware of the need to make hard budgetary choices to achieve the
objectives of the NEA without undermining the soundness of public finances or the sustainability
of its debt. In the Letter of Development Policy accompanying the proposed PERL, Government
has outlined a number of key policy measures that will reduce the fiscal deficit by about one
percentage point of GDP a year while redirecting public spending from recurrent to capital
spending in high priority areas. At the same time, planned expenditures are being phased
carefully so as to prevent expenditure bunching, and match the absorptive capacity of the
responsible institutions. To set clearer spending priorities and improve the management of public
resources, Government has decided to introduce a MTEF and has asked the Bank to provide
assistance in developing and implementing it. The Bank plans to respond to this request and
conduct a comprehensive Public Expenditure Review (PER) with the authorities in FY02/03.
Education: The Socioeconomic Rationale for Education Reform
58. Among the high priority areas, the authorities' focus on education is particularly
opportune. It has the potential to create a cohesive society consisting of knowledgeable, highly
skilled, and flexible citizens who are able to derive their livelihood from a variety of economic
activities. However, significant investments and policy reforms in education are needed to fully
achieve its goals, both economic and social.
59.

Economic rationalefor education reform. As mentioned earlier, education reform is

necessary for economic growth because of the country's shortfalls in comparison with competing
high-skill economies. The education gap between Mauritius and East Asian countries is
particularly large and will take between ten and twenty years to eliminate. Government has
candidly admitted that reforms in education are long overdue and that Mauritius needs to catch
up if it is to be successful in creating a skills-based economy. The Government also recognizes
that competitiveness can no longer originate from low-cost labor but will need to rely on
increased labor productivity.

17

60. Social rationaleforeducation reform. The social dimension of Mauritius education
reform program is at least as important as the economic dimension. The Mauritian education
system is elitist. Many Mauritians, especially those that have attended the so-called "starschools," have excelled and now live in conditions similar to well-off middle-class citizens in
OECD countries. However, selected segments of the Mauritian population have been left out of
the benefits of Mauritius' development success. Virtually all of those are school dropouts who
have not completed secondary school, and have low levels of skill. For them, stories of the
Mauritius' "economic miracle" do not correspond to their day-to-day reality. They experience
long periods of unemployment and have difficulty with educational expenses for their children.
And they face the humiliation of their own children dropping out of school, as they did, at an
early stage. They fear that their children will fall prey to drug abuse or criminal activities.
Government is fully aware of the role of education in preventing such social exclusion.
61. The Government's education strategy is a courageous yet overdue move to do away with a
system that creates a privileged elite. Previous attempts to reform education proved politically
controversial and led to the fall of an earlier MSM-MMM coalition Government in 1995. The
current education reform plan is also controversial and entails difficult negotiations on key issues
such as tne number of subjects, teacher workload and retraining, and the composition of the
classrooms, with poorer and richer children mixed in the same classroom. For all these reasons,
the dialogue that Government conducted at the initial stages of the reform was arduous. Now,
however, it is moving along well. All parties accept the need for reform. The Bank actively
supports the proposals to make quality education much more accessible to broader segments of
Mauritian society. The Government realizes that education reform of the type envisaged is a
long-term objective, and requires sustained policy attention and extensive dialogue with all
concerned: teachers, unions, parents, and employers. The Bank would continue to provide
support for reforms in the education sector throughout the CAS period.
Social Cohesion: Getting a Grip on Inequality
62. Mauritius has done remarkably well in maintaining social cohesion between different
ethnic groups and reducing poverty, but inequality remains an issue. The inhabitants of
Rodrigues for example, have not fully benefited from the Mauritian "economic miracle". More
attention will need to be given to providing ample opportunities to disadvantaged groups and
protecting the most vulnerable in Mauritian society.
Unemployment Could Harm the Social Fabric
63. Unemployment is rising and presents a threat to maintaining the social fabric. Between
1990 and 2000, the demand for jobs has increased by a total of 19 percent. New jobs on the other
hand increased by only 15 percent. The high level of demand for jobs stems partly from the
rapidly increasing numbers of educated women seeking work. Among the unemployed, 36
percent did not pass the certificate of primary school education exam. Another twenty percent
did attend secondary school but did not complete secondary education. Thus many of the
unemployed feel rejected twice-first in failing their exams at school and then in the labor
market. In that sense, Government's policy of increasing educational quality and reducing
dropouts may help solve part of the skills mismatch that currently characterizes the labor market.

18

64.
Several policy actions will need to be pursued vigorously in order to reduce
unemployment and create jobs for those entering the labor market. First, the increase in labor
productivity will need to exceed the increase in real wages. Second, hurdles to job creation for
new entrants to the labor markets need to be removed by, for example, encouraging a greater use
of temporary employment contracts. Third, education needs to be better tailored to the needs of
the labor market, and incentives for on-the-job training may need to be provided. Greater
flexibility may also be needed to help two members of one household to work for example by
encouraging part-time work, providing childcare close to the work place, or providing children
of working parents with more public transportation to the schools they attend. The Government
and the World Bank have agreed to carry out joint studies aimed at addressing the
unemployment problem.
Following through on Anticorruption
65.
As mentioned earlier, the new Government was elected on an anticorruption platform and
its anticorruption legislation and program are advanced and address the key challenges.
Implementation and follow-through on this agenda will be essential throughout the CAS period
if broad support for the reform program is to be sustained.
Legal Reforms Can Still Go Further
66.
On legal reform, there remain areas where legislation could be improved and where the
modernization of the legal system should be actively pursued. An example cited by the Mauritian
business community is labor law. Also, the increased focus on information technology makes it
critical for legislation to keep up with advances in the sector. The Law Reform Commission
established in 1992 should be revived and supported with greater resources and staff. It would
thus be enabled to pursue its mandate to manage the law reform process.
67.
One of the most important problems facing the judicial system is attracting the most
qualified legal experts to the judiciary and providing the appropriate incentives to retain them for
lengthy careers. At present, turnover is very high. Judges are given substantially lower
remuneration packages than private sector lawyers, so the attractiveness of a judgeship is
significantly reduced despite the prestige attached to the position. The loss of valuable
experience and continuity is a high cost of this rapid tumnover; reducing this loss by increasing
the financial incentives for long-term service would in fact prove cost effective in the long run.
Furthermore, although the integrity of the judiciary is well respected, poor remuneration could
leave some judges vulnerable to outside financial influence. Finally, the inadequate number of
judges leads to overworked magistrates, a lengthy backlog of cases, and a judicial system that is
slow and unable to respond to the needs placed on it by civil society. Reorganization of the
judicial system is critical to improving the efficiency of the system.
68.
Following the September 11 events, the Mauritian National Legislative Assembly
enacted a tough antiterrorist bill. Members of the parliamentary opposition opposed the bill and
Mr. Cassam Uteem, the president of the republic who had proposed amendments to the bill that
were rejected by the Assembly, resigned. In light of the overall strength of Mauritian institutions
and the nature of the legislation, the recent resignation is not expected to have a major effect on

19

governance, the Government's economic program, or the effectiveness of Bank-supported
interventions.
IV. THE EXPERIENCE UNDER 1997 CAS AND THE NEW CAS
Bank Group Performance and Experience under Previous CAS
69.
Mauritius has been a Bank borrower for the last 22 years. The last IDA credit was given
in 1974. In the 1980s, the Bank supported macroeconomic and sectoral policy reforms through
quick-disbursing loans. Following the success of the structural adjustment effort, the Bank has
focused on project lending.
70.
The 1997 Country Assistance Strategy was aimed at assisting Mauritius to support
productivity growth to (i) improve the quality of human resources; (ii) develop high-quality
public sector services; (iii) reduce protection and provide incentives to raise investment and
productivity; and (iv) protect the environment by addressing ecology and waste management.
Table 3. 1997 CASActivities: Planned and Achieved
Fully
achieved

Planned Activity
Lending

Health ($10 million)
Environment ($15 million)
Financial Infrastructure ($5 million)

Partially
achieved

Not
undertaken

/
v

Economic and Sector Work

Public Expenditure review
Country Economic Memorandum
Long-term perspective study
Civil service reform
Welfare state reform
Labor market reform
Health sector review
Education
Transport Strategy

v

v

/
X

v
_

_

V

__

V

71.
Many of the structural issues described in this CAS were already identified during the
1997 CAS. Most notable were Mauritius' reliance on preferential trade agreements and the
weakness in Mauritius' education system. However, until the September 2000 elections, the
vigor with which Government addressed the key structural challenges fell short of the
expectations laid out in the 1997 CAS. The Bank's support during the previous CAS period
targeted the financial, infrastructure, and environmental sectors. However, many activities
envisaged under the previous CAS did not materialize, including an operation in the health sector
and some key analytical work, such as an education study and a health sector review. While
each of the existing projects as well as the new projects performed satisfactorily with very high
20

portfolio performance indicators (percentage of projects at risk at zero, pro-activity and realism
ratings at 100 percent, etc.) the assistance package as a whole did not have the strategic impact
that was originally foreseen.
72.
There are many reasons for the divergence between CAS plans and actual achievements.
One important reason was the wait-and-see attitude on the part of the prior Government on key
policy reforms; this was especially true of those affecting Mauritius' social fabric and those that
are politically difficult to implement, such as overhaul of the education system. The Bank was
too optimistic about its ability to influence the policy dialogue and carry out an ambitious
analytical agenda. On the whole, the Bank's role in helping the prior Government to anticipate
and solve its structural problems and formulate timely policy responses to new challenges was
more limited than anticipated.
The Bank's Existing Portfolio

73. The Bank currently has three projects in its portfolio, supporting the financial and
infrastructure sectors, for a total commitment of US$19 million equivalent and undisbursed
balances of US$11.2 million. The Financial Sector Supervisory Authority project was recently
approved by the Board and is expected to be implemented quickly. All projects under
implementation are rated as satisfactory and are meeting their development objectives. A Port
Development and Environmental Protection project of US$30.5 million was recently closed.
Table 4. World Bank Portfolio in Mauritius
(as ofMarch 25, 2002)

Env. Sewerage & Sanitation
Financial Sector Infrastructure
Financial Sector Supervisory

Approval
Date

Effectiveness Date

Closing
Date

Net Com.
(US$mil)

Undisb.
(US$mil)

2/12/98
4/4/00

2/3/99
7/24/00

6/30/03
6/30/03

12.4
4.8

7.2
2.2

4/30/04

1.8

1.8

19.0

11.2

12/4/01

Authorityv

TOTAL

74.
The Bank has also been supporting environmental management through several Global
Environment Fund (GEF) funded operations. The Biodiversity Restoration Project, closed at the
end of 2001, supported technology to help propagate critically endangered endemic plant species
on Ile aux Aigrettes, Round Island and Rodrigues. As a result, Ile aux Aigrette is almost back to
its original vegetation, while the follow-up GEF-funded Restoration of Round Island project
(US$750,000) will continue the long-term efforts needed to restore Round Island. Discussions
are also under way with Government for possible further GEF support in the area of integrated
coastal zone Management for the main land, the Islets and Rodrigues. Lastly, the Bank is also
managing two sub-regional GEF-funded operations under COI (Commission de l'Ocean Indien),
the Regional Oil Spill Contingency Planning Project and the Regional Coral Reef Monitoring
Project.

21

The New CAS: PERLs and ESW
A Series of PERLs Based on Prior Actions
75.
The Bank lending and non-lending program contained in this CAS supports the
Government's NEA. The financial assistance would consist of a series of public expenditure
reform loans (PERLs) that will support the Government's reform agenda. The processing of the
PERLs would be timed so as to coincide with Government's own budget cycle. The first PERL
(Memorandum of the President, Report No. P-7518-MAS) that accompanies this CAS could thus
be disbursed before the beginning of Government's new fiscal year on July 1, 2002. Follow-up
PERLs would be timed to coincide with Mauritius' budgetary cycle so that proceeds of World
Bank loans are available at the beginning of Mauritius' fiscal year. Thus, the World Bank would
provide a regular and predictable source of long-term finance in support of Govermment's NEA.
All planned lending, with the exception of IFC, MIGA, and Global Environment Facility (GEF)
operations, would take place under the umbrella of the PERLs. World Bank financing of
individual new projects would be phased out and implementation of existing projects would be
accelerated.
76.
The support proposed under the first PERL is justified by the actions undertaken by the
Government under the FY01/02 budget. This budget translates Government's vision of creating a
knowledge-based economy into concrete policy measures and related budget allocations. The
budget was approved by the National Legislative Assembly in July 2001. Thus, an important first
step has been taken in restructuring Mauritius' public finances and aligning budget resources
with the needs of the NEA. The accompanying Memorandum of the President of the first PERL
provides the full details and the justification for the proposed support.
Easing the Transition
77.
The availability of the financing provided through the first PERL and subsequent PERLs
is expected to ease the transition towards a restructured budget that is in line with the
requiremnents of the NEA. The reform measures embodied in the NEA require substantial
additional financial resources over a prolonged period of time. For example, to move to the next
level of development, teachers will need to be recruited and trained, new schools need to be
built, and virtually all new schools will need to be equipped with information technology in the
next three years. This will cause a spike in public spending. Although there is scope for
efficiency measures in education, both the authorities and the Bank realize that it will take time
before these efficiency measures yield results. Bank financing would support the transition
toward an education system that is in line with the requirements of a modern economy. At the
same time, Bank will support other reforms that contribute to reducing the budget deficit.
Heavy Reliance on ESW
78.
To support the NEA, analytical and economic and sector work (ESW) will need to be
strengthened considerably. An amnbitious ESW agenda has been designed and agreed upon with
the Government and selected donors. This ESW agenda would be funded and carried out jointly

22

with the Government, civil society, and selected donors, such as the UN system, the European
Union and the African Development Bank.
Box 2: CAS ConsultationProcess
,xtensive CAS consultations were held with the following institutions: Anou Diboute Ensam; AntiErosion Programme; Basic Education for Adolescents (VEFA); Board of Investment; Caritas; Federation
of Civil Service Unions; Joint Economnic Council; Mauritius Council of Social Services (MACOSS);
Mauritius Employers Federation; Mauritius Freeport Authority; Mauritius Labor Congress; National
Handicraft Promotion Agency; National Trade Unions Confederation; Plantation Workers Union; Trust
Fund of the Social Integration of Vulnerable Groups of the Ministry of Finance; Rodrigues Council of
Social Services; Rodrigues Women's Regional Committee; and Transparency International.
During the CAS preparation mission held in November 2001, two focus groups were organized by staff of
the Trust Fund of the Social Integration of Vulnerable Groups. The first group met in the Northeastern
part of the island and was made up of unemployed men and women in their 40s and 50s. This group had
primarily been employed in the area at recently closed textile factories. They were let go with few or no
benefits and, generally, have no other skills. The majority in this group were women with children, who
were divorced or abandoned by their husbands. The second group was made up of fishermen from the
Southwestern part of the island, one of the poorer groups in the country. Discussions with this group
focused on the difficulties faced by fishermen in earning a living.
A round of CAS consultations was held in January 2002. These consultations were held in part in
Rodrigues and covered a variety of Government funded poverty alleviation programs. In addition,
extensive consultations were held with a number of labor unions to discuss, in particular, the proposed
reforms in education. The Mauritian press (TV, radio, and newspapers) provided extensive coverage of
these consultations.
On the whole, NGOs were satisfied with the consultation process, the openness of the discussions and the
opportunity to express views and debate development issues. The NGOs expressed the need for followthrough on the discussions held with Government and the Bank, and the desire for genuine cooperation.
Some NGOs expressed skepticism of the Bank's intentions and recalled the experience of the adjustment
process in the early 1980s. Among those who recalled this adjustment experience, it was viewed as
imposed from above and as being unnecessarily painful.
Discussions were also held with the key donors such as the African Development Bank, the European
Union and the United Nations Development Programme. Draft documents were shared early and
agreements were reached on exchange of information and collaboration on joint pieces of ESW.
Rationalefor the FY02-04 Strategy
79.
This CAS is based on an ambitious ESW program and brings all World Bank financial
assistance under the umbrella of a series of PERLs. The Bank supports the objectives and the
vision underpinning the NEA and the Government of Mauritius has requested the Bank to
provide financing to directly support the NEA. This financial assistance would be timed so as to
coincide with the budget cycle followed in Mauritius. The Bank has also been requested to reorient its ESW program to focus on areas most relevant to the successful implementation of the
NEA.

23

80.
This request draws upon the lessons of the previous CAS. Even though the Government
found the advice and financing provided under the previous CAS through individual projects and
selected ESW to be useful, it nevertheless feels a different and more flexible approach is required
to meet its current needs. Government also feels that the cost of Bank project financing is
relatively high. Based on Mauritius' reputation and credit ratings, Government is able to secure
project financing on terms that are more competitive than those offered by the World Bank.
However, few of Mauritius' other partners has the ability to provide both long-term financing as
well as relevant policy advice in support of the overall development program. This unique ability
of the World Bank underlies Government's request and the design of the CAS.
81.
In principle, Government could finance higher public spending advocated by the NEA
through increased domestic borrowing, as it has done in the past. However, Government wishes
to limit domestic borrowing to avoid crowding out private sector financing. Mauritius has an
open capital account and assuming that enterprises have the tools to hedge themselves against
foreign exchange risks, Mauritian enterprises could, in theory, borrow from abroad and thus
avoid high domestic interest rates. In practice, however, Mauritian firms have relied almost
entirely on long-standing relations with domestic banks and the rolling over of short-term credit
to meet the need of firms for term finance. It will take time before Mauritian firms start
borrowing abroad and in foreign exchange. As Mauritius' external debt is at comparatively low
levels in relation to its GDP and its exports, the Government has decided to diversify the sources
for its financing needs. Recourse to World Bank financing fits within the overall debt financing
strategy of the Mauritian Government.
82.
From the Bank's perspective, the "umbrella" type of assistance requested by the
Mauritian government makes sense. Mauritius has a development and economic performance
track record that is among the strongest in the developing world. The country also has developed
proven institutional capacity to formulate and successfully implement medium-term
development plans. The CAS builds on this track record by using existing structures to channel
and deliver Bank financial assistance. Contrary to other developing countries, Mauritius needs
neither special World Bank project management units nor earmarked extra-budgetary funds to
implement its NEA. The Bank has reviewed and assessed the accountability framework of public
expenditures. A Country Profile of Financial Accountability (CPFA) was carried out in
September 1998 and an update was made during a November 2001 mission. In February 2002,
the Bank also carried out a Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR). The conclusion
of both the CPFA and CPAR confirmed the overall positive assessment of public sector
management. In terns of key tests such as timeliness of budget approval, execution of approved
budget, preparation of annual accounts, and publication of audit findings, the Bank found the
Mauritian perfonnance to be among the best in the developing world. The discrepancy between
budgeted and actual expenditures for example is minimal and deadlines for budget preparation,
approval and audits have been met without exception for the last decade. Public sector
procurement practices were found to be of high quality with respect to transparency and choice
between competing bids.
83.
In terms of policy measures, the proposed PERLs build on the findings and
recommendations of a 1999 Public Expenditure Review (PER) as well as a number of sectoral
studies carried out with Bank assistance, such as the Transport Master Plan and NEAP 2.

24

Through the PERL, the Bank would support policy measures that it has been discussing with the
Mauritian authorities as a result of past ESW.
84.
Moreover, the PERLs are expected to yield economies of scale by being more cost
efficient than a series of individual projects, as supervision missions for multiple projects and
separate procurement and disbursement procedures would no longer be needed. All activities
would be carried out under the umbrella of the PERL. By centering all Bank activities around
Government's NEA, and designing a program of ESW jointly with the Government, the Bank
can play the role of knowledge broker and leverage its funds with those of Govermment and those
other donors.
CAS Scenarios: Base Case and High Case
85.
In the base case of the CAS, the Bank will lend up to US$80 million for the period FY0204 through two individual PERLs of up to US$40 million each, one in FY02 and one in FY04. In
the high case, the Bank will undertake three annual PERLs, thus increasing the lending envelope
to up to US$120 million over three years. In the low case of the CAS, Bank lending would be
limited to the first PERL of US$40 million in FY02. Throughout the CAS period, and
irrespective of the scenario, a comprehensive program of ESW would be undertaken, consisting
of one piece of formal ESW and two policy papers per year.
Table 5. Economic and Sector Work, 2002-2004
Policy objective

FY 02/03

FY 03/04

Competitiveness Comprehensive PER focused on
social sectors /establishment of

FY 04/05

Informal economy
and taxation

CEM/CDR focused
on institutions

Labor market review

Health study

Social welfare study

Gender assessment

MTEF

Social cohesion

Training and education sector
strategy note

Public
procurement

Country Procurement Assessment
Report

Environment

Alternative mode of transport
Port Louis city centre integrated
land use and transport action plan

86.
As Mauritius' macroeconomic program is on track, Government's fiscal program is
sustainable and a number of significant policy measures have already been taken, the
prerequisites for the first PERL have already been met. The accompanying Memorandum of the
President (Report No. P-75 18-MAS) contains a full description of the policy measures taken and
spells out expected outcomes and specific policy measures that will be supported through
subsequent PERLs.

25

Table 6. CAS Triggers, 2002-2004
Policy area
Fiscal

Competitiveness

Base Case

High Case

* MTEF formulated and implementation

* Satisfactory implementation of strategy to

plan approved

contain contingent liabilities
* Satisfactory implementation of MTEF
action plan

* Review of fiscal incentive regime

* Satisfactory implementation of
recommendations of the review of the fiscal
incentive study

completed and action plan for reform
formulated
Poverty and
Welfare

* Satisfactory implementation of National
Poverty Alleviation Action Plan

* Formulation of plan to reform social
assistance and welfare programs
* Continued satisfactory implementation of
National Poverty Alleviation Action Plan

Education

* Education and Training Sector Strategy,
completed, and discussed with stake
holders and satisfactorily implemented
* Satisfactory implementation of the
second National Environmental Action
Plan

* Continued satisfactory implementation of
Education and Training Sector Strategy

Environment

* Continued satisfactory implementation of
the second National Environmental Action
Plan

87.
For subsequent PERLs, a general prerequisite is that the macroeconomic program and
Government's fiscal program continues to be on track and sustainable. Table 6 outlines the
necessary reforms to be undertaken by the Govermnent in the base case scenario, completion of
which will trigger PERL2. Government has requested the Bank to process one PERL every year.
It expects that it will complete all the actions described in Table 6 and the Memorandum of the
President before the end of FY03. Under those circumstances, the Bank would move into the
high case, which will include the processing of PERL2 in FY03 and preparation of PERL3 in
FY04. Overall progress in the implementation of the NEA will be monitored through
Government's policy matrix (see Annex I).
Table 7. Lending Scenarios
Scenarios
FY 02
FY 03
FY 04
Total FY02-04 IBRD lending ($mil)

Base case

High case

PERL 1 ($40 mil)

PERL 1 ($40 mil)
PERL 2 ($40 mil)
PERL 3 ($40 mil)
120

-

PERL 2 ($40 mil)
80

IBRD Exposure in Mauritius
88.
IBRD exposure in Mauritius has declined over the last decade. The proposed assistance
strategy would reverse that trend. But, assuming continued growth and no major increase in
interest rates, IBRD exposure ratios in Mauritius are expected to remain well within IBRD
guidelines over the forecast period. Under the high case scenario with a three-year lending
program of US$120 million, Mauritius' debt service payments to IBRD-expressed as a share of
total debt service on public and publicly guaranteed debt-would increase from 7.4 percent in
26

2001/02 to 13.1 percent in 2003/04 and 15 percent in 2008. As a percentage of total exports, debt
service payments to IBRD are expected to decline from 0.9 percent in FY98/99 to 0.5 percent in
FY04/05 and 0.4 percent in 2008 (see Annex B7).
Role of Other World Bank Group Members
89.
IFC has a total portfolio in Mauritius of US$1.6 million consisting of two projects: a steel
project and a venture capital fund. No new investments have been made since 1996. IFC's main
focus for future activity is to support the deepening of the financial market, undertake advisory
work, and make investments in private infrastructure. These focus areas complement the Bank's
strategy. First, IFC's assistance would increase private firms' access to foreign term finance, thus
reducing demand on domestic savings and alleviating upward pressure on domestic interest rates.
Second, it would allow Government to move gradually out of sectors it has traditionally been
involved in and improve efficiency in the provision of infrastructure. Thus, IFC's involvement
will contribute to the competitiveness objective. In addition, domestic interest rates are expected
to be reduced, relieving Government budget through (i) lower interest payments; and (ii) lower
subsidies and transfers to public enterprises.
90.
MIGA has issued four contracts guaranteeing a total investment of US$58.6 million in
support of an agribusiness project by Mauritian investors in Mozambique. MIGA has also
provided technical assistance to the Mauritius Export Development and Investment Authority.
Given Mauritius' favorable investment climate, MIGA's role in Mauritius per se is expected to
be limited, in contrast with its role in facilitating Mauritian investments in nearby African
countries. Similarly IFC will, in the next few years, focus on the promotion of foreign direct
investment by Mauritian entrepreneurs in countries such as Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania,
and Comoros.
Role of Other Donors
91.
The Bank is working closely with the IMF on reform of public resource management, the
tax system, the pension system, and introduction of the MTEF. As Mauritius does not face a
balance of payments problem and its reserves are at comfortable levels, it is on a standard annual
Article IV consultation cycle with the IMF. The IMF advanced its annual Article IV
consultations so as to overlap with a planned PERL mission. Fund staff are expected to present
their staff report and Article IV to their Board of Executive Directors shortly after presentation of
this CAS and the PERL to the Executive Directors of the World Bank Group.
92.
As per capita income in Mauritius has increased, official development assistance (ODA)
has declined significantly. Total ODA in the form of grants now amounts to about US$35 million
a year. Most ODA grants to Mauritius are for the environment sector. The European Union is the
largest provider of grants to Mauritius, mainly in support of the Plaines Wilhelms Project and the
West Coast Sewerage Project. Loans by the European Investment Bank were granted for
infrastructure projects such as the upgrading and extension of the passenger terminal of the
international airport and the rehabilitation and extension of the sewerage system in the Plaines
Wilhelms area. Other donors involved in the environment and infrastructure sector include the
Kuwaiti Fund, the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation, the German Kreditanstalt for

27

Wiederaufbau (KfW), and the World Bank through the GEF. Total existing commitments (grants
and loans) by external donors for the environment for 2002-10 amount to about RslO billon
(US$300 million).
Table 8. Total Development Assistance, 1999
Source of aid

UN system
World Bank
European Union
Bilateral
Subtotal

Type ofAid

Commitments
(US$ millions)

Grants
Loans
Grants
Loans
Grants
Loans
Grants
Loans

2.1
0
1.2
47.7
6.0
11.7
25.5
1.4

Grants

34.8

Loans

60.8

95.6

Total
Source: UNDP

Risks and Mitigation Measures
93.
i.

The strategy faces three risks:
Policy reforms fall short or are not implemented. The scope and depth of the reforms

proposed by the Government for the outer years of the CAS could fall short of what is
required to achieve the three core CAS objectives. This risk would be diminished by
significantly strengthening ESW and ensuring that it is accompanied by extensive policy
dialogue, consultation, and dissemination of information. The experience with the
analytical work on pension reform carried out in Mauritius in FY02 is a good example of
a policy dialogue sustained over a long period of time, based on a series of reports by
many experts, the holding of seminars open to the press and wide dissemination.
ii.

Implementation delays occur. Another risk is that the implementation and timing of the

reforms could fall short of what is currently foreseen. For example efforts cold fail to
bring the education system up to international levels, or weaker political support for the
current Government could lead to a less proactive policy stance and a slow-down in
implementation. This risk can be reduced by ensuring that the reforms are well designed,
fully financed, and lead to the desired results.
iii.

There is insufficient fiscal adjustment. The Government's budget foresees a gradual
reduction in the fiscal deficit to about 3 percent of GDP for FY05/06. This path of fiscal
adjustment leads to sustainable debt levels. The market's assessment of Mauritian paper
is based on the expectation that Mauritius will be able to achieve its fiscal targets and the
economy will continue to grow. There is a risk though that the fruits of the ongoing
transformation into a service-based economy will take longer to materialize than
currently foreseen. If, in the interim period, Mauritius were to face a series of external

28

shocks the debt burden could become excessively high. For example, preferential trade
agreements could come to an end in a period of slowdown in the world economy, a drop
in tourism, and the occurrence of adverse climatic shocks such as cyclones. In that
combination of events, foreign exchange earnings would drop, economic growth would
slow down and the fiscal deficit could increase rapidly. Mauritius' credit ratings could
decline and interest rates could increase. The Government's debt burden could become
unsustainable. In those circumstances, the Bank would need to revise its lending program
and focus on measures that allow Mauritius to return to sustainable debt levels. By
actively supporting the transformation of Mauritius' economy and through instruments
such as the PER, an analysis of contingent liabilities, and the introduction of the MTEF,
the CAS intends to minimize this risk. On public resource management issues, including
the strengthening and broadening of Mauritius' revenue, the Bank is working closely
with the IMF. The Bank is also cooperating closely with other development partners to
maximize the likelihood of success in the transformation of the Mauritian economy.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By Shengman Zhang
Washington, DC
April 9, 2002

29

Annex I
Page I of 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES
Overarching Objective: reduce
poverty.

GOVT POLICIES
See actions and policies listed
under A, B, and C below

PARTNERS
Govemment, Private Sector,
Unions, Civil Society Donors

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
Percentage of population living below 50%
of median income (poverty line) as
measured in 2001 HBS. Percentage of
population living below same poverty line

TIMNG
FY 01/02 -FY 05/06

in 2006

Reduce national poverty head count index
by around 2% points between 2002 and
2006.
A. INCREASED
COMPETmVENESS AND
PRODUCTIVrTY

Achieve Average Annual GDP
Growth of around 5.5% (real
temis) over 2002-2006.

See actions and policies listed
under A, B, and C below

Government, Private Sector,
Unions, Civil Society Donors

Real GDP growth rates as published in
National Accounts.

Effectiveness in public
expenditures

Develop a medium term
expenditure framework to
prioritise govemment expenditure
and increase value for money of
expenditures

MOF and sectoral ministries

Fiscal deficit to be reduced to about 3% of
GDP
High-level committee to be set up to
examine the scope of MTEF to be adopted
Implementation of first generation MTEF

FY05/06

The Sugar Industry Efficiency Act passed.

Completed 2001.

(i) Number of companies adopting the
Voluntary Retirement Scheme. Seventeen
out ofnineteen companies adopted VRS.

(ii) No legal deadline for
companies to adopt VRS

FY02/03

Agriculture

Reduce Production costs in sugar
at
(i) field level

(i) Introduce flexibility in
employment practices at field
level through a Voluntary
Retirement Scheme (VRS)

(ii) factory level

(ii) Encourage economies ofscale
at factory level

Re-orient/Modemise the nonsugar sector
2001-2005

Encourage the development of
non-sugar sector for domestic
consumption/exports

The Ministry of Agriculture, Food
Technology and Natural
Resources.
The corporate sector of the sugar
industry:
- Mauritius Sugar Producers
Association
Mauritius Chamber of
Agriculture
All growing and milling
companies
The Ministry of Agriculture, Food
Technology and Natural
Resources.
All private sector
companies/groups/industrialists
operating in the non-sugar sector

(ii) Number of factories closing down to
merge into larger ones. 3 companies have
already confirmed their closures as at 2002.
Six companies out of 14 to close down by
2008.
A strategic document for non-sugar sector
to be produced.

Second Semester 2002.

Annex 1
Page 2 of 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES
Tourism
Ensure Sustainable Development
of Tourism

GOVT POLICIES

PARTNERS

Preparation of a Tourism
Development Plan for Mauritius
and a five-year Action Plan

-

Informationand Communications Technology (ICT)
1. Preparation of E-Govemment
Use technology to improve Master Plan
population access to govenmment 2. Government Online Centre
services
3. ICT Package of Incentives
4. Constructon of Cybercity
Construcion
ofCbercity

MONITORABLEOUTCOMES

European Union
MEDFSCA
Ministry of Tourism
Ministry of Local
Goveimnent
Ministry of Public Utilities
Ministry for Rodrigues
Ministry of Housing and
Lands

TIMING

Implementation of the Tourism
Development Plan by mid-2002
Average expenditure per tourist
Number of well-defined quality resorts
Leisure facilities at public beaches
Diversification of the tourism product eco-tourism, business and video
conferencing

_

M/lnformation Technology &
Telecommunications
National Computer Board
Ministry of Finance
Business Parks of Mauritius
Limited
Mauritius Telecom
Private sector

1. All Government services to be on-line by
year 2005.
2. Contract for consultancy services to
advise NCB on the Online Centre is being
awarded.

1. On-going
2.Award of contract in March
2002.
Duration of study is 15
weeks
3. January 2002
4. Design: First half of 2002
Construction: start second half of
2002
Completion: 2003

Decrease connection cost and
encourage investment in the ICT
sector

5. Establishment of the ICT
Authority (to regulate the ICT
sector)
6. Reduce rates for intemational
connectivity
7. Open Internet Service Provider
Market **

5. ICT Bill passed in December 2001

5. ICT Authority set up in the
second half of 2002.
6. Satellite: ongoing
Cable fibre optics: April 2002

7. The Mauritius Telecommunications
Authority (MTA) has already approved
.______________
____ _some
20 applications for ISP's.

Privatesector/lndustry/Public Utilities
Promote SME growth and
employment generation

1.SME Development Bill
The Bill provides inter alia for.
-a better definition of SMEs
based on criteria for employment,
annual tumover and capital value
ofproduction equipment; and
-providing duty free importation
of production equipment and raw
materials for SMEs.
2. Improve SMEs Access to
Finance:
-SME Credit Guarantee Fund
(CGF)
Equity Participation Fund (EPF)

Ministry of Industry &
Intemational Trade
Development Bank of Mauritius
(DBM)
State Investment Corporation
(SIC)
SMIDO
Delegation of the European
Commission and SME operators
Ministry of Finance
Small operators

____________
__
3. Micro Credit Fund (MCF)

I. Bill to be introduced in the National
Assembly.
2. CGF: Target beneficiaries: 600 SMEs
EPF: Target beneficiaries: 100 SMEs
3. MCF: Expected disbursement
Contribution of SMEs to GDP and
employment creation

_

2

1. Second semester of 2002

Annex I
Page 3 OF 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES
|
Restructure textile sector
Ensure maximum use of AGOA

Review of the Fiscal Incentive
Regime

To
promote
transparency,
accountability, and efficiency
Protect small shareholders
Increase transparency in publicly
listed companies
Facilitate opening of shareholdings
in pnivate companies

GOVT POLICIES
Develop and implement a
Strategic Plan for Restructuring
the Textile Sector and
Comprehensive Strategy under
the AGOA by June 2002 with
key issues being:
1. Technology
2. Investment
3. Exports
4. Cluster-type development
with a regional emphasis
Harmonisation of the fiscal
incentive regime

Promote
good
Corporate
Govemance principles in the
public and private sector

-

PARTNERS
MIIT, MEDFSCA
EDZDA, MIDA, SMIDO
BOI, MCCI, SEC
Private Sector Operators

Ministry of Justice &Human
Rights, Board of Investment
MoF, MEDFSCA, UNDP
MoA, MoT
UNCTAD
MIIT, JEC, MCCI
MEDFSCA
Private Sector Organisations
The World Bank
-

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
Preparation of Strategic Plan
I . Setting up of a model factory at the
Clothing Technology Centre
2. Investment in spinning mill
3. Increase in textile exports, extent of
diversification in products &markets
4. Integration involving SMEs

TIMING
The first quaner of 2002 and
onwards

-A

new set of legislation that will be WTO
compatible

Study will be completed during the
second semester of 2002.
Implementation will start as soon
as the report is approved by
Govemment

Establish a Committee on Corporate
Govemance
Assessment of corporate govemance

Number of companies adopting Codes /
guidelines for Mauritius
Establishment of an Institute of Directors

Committee
established
in
September 2001
Assistance of World Bank obtained
for assessment of corporate
govemance (Report on Observance
of Standards and Codes) in
Mauritius. Expected completion June 2002.
Codes / guidelines could be ready
during fourth quarter of year 2002.
Second half 2002

Transport

Road
Address traffic issues
*Reduce congestion
*Improve safety
*Minimise congestion costs
Ensure
Public
Investment
Programme reflects Master Plan
Upgrading / Strengthening / New
Road Infrastructure
Prepare
the
ground
for
medium/long
term
efficient
management of transport flows
around the city/port complex

Implement the Transport Master
Plan

Ministry of Public Infrastructure,
land Transport &Shipping
Private &Public Sector Operators

Relieve congestion
Upgrade safety and security of road
infrastructure
Monitor the number ofaccidents
Improve public transport system

Introduction of an alternative mode
of transport (AMT) for mass transit
in the Port Louis-Curepipe corridor
Implementation of other activities
to streamline transport congestion

To provide safe and reliable road
infrastructure
for
the
modemisation of the economy.
Develop continuous dialogue
between
MPA/Port
Louis
Municipality/MEPZA
to
anticipate traffic flows and plan
port and urban developments
accordingly

Ministry of Public Infrastructure,
Land Transport &Shipping

Completion of individual projects.
14 projects have been lined up.

Projects have different start and
completion dates.

3

Some

Annex 1
Page 4 of 12
MAURITIUS
OBJECTIVES
l
Air transport
Provide solutions to adequacy of
air transport facilities - seat and
cargo capacity

GOVT POLICIES
Preparation of Air Transport
Master Plan

Port
Increasing
Productivity
&
Efficiency in the Port Sector
To reduce cost and maximise
capacity utilisation

Seek Strategic Alliance for Cargo
Handling Corporation

CAS MATRIX 2002-2004

PARTNERS
M/Extemal Communications
Other Govemnment Ministries
Private Sector

Ministry ofExtemal
Communications
Mauritius Ports Authority
Cargo Handling Corporation Ltd

Training of port workers to help
them adapt to new working
environment and technology.

Modernisation of the Port

Review the Role of the Mauritius
Freeport Authority

* Review the role of the port
authority as a promoter of
economic development
* Update the 1996 Port Master
Plan to year 2020 horizon.
Introduce new legislation to
strengthen the regulatory role of
the MFA.
MFA to divest its
operational activities.

B. IMPROVED SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL COHESION
Education and Vocational TrainingReforms
Improve quality of and access to
Develop a comprehensive
education
education strategy

Increase enrolment in primary and
secondary education and vocational
training

Increase enrolment in secondary
school and improve access to
education system

Mauritius Ports Authority

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
TOR for Master Plan redrafted in light of
comments from World Bank and relevant
stakeholders.
Upgrading of airport infrastructure and
facilities to passengers
Air traffic safety
Consolidation of air routes
Deadline for submission of tenders for
Phase A (Advisory services on Economic
& Regulatory Aspects of the Sale of
Shares in CHCL on 11 Feb 2002.
Tenders for Phase B (Advisory Services to
Manage &Carry out the Sale Transaction)
will be launched AprilMay 2002.
Equipment for Training Programme
Consultant to advise on setting up of
training centre

*
*
*

Make the port more competitive
Improvement in productivity
Improve port infrastructure

TIMING
End-March 2002

From 2002 to 2004

Strategic Partner to be in place by
December 2002

Tenders for equipment to be relaunched by end March 2002
Direct
negotiations
finalised.
Consultant already on site.
On-going

Mauritius Freeport Authority

The New Act seeks to strengthen the
regulatory and legal framework of MFA to
respond to the
changing business
environment.

Act No. 17 of 2001
October 2001.

MOESR, World Bank

Education sector strategy note

September 2002

MOESR

Increases enrollment of 12-16 age-group
population from 76% in 2001 to about
100% in 2008.

Pass Rates
Increase in CPE pass rate from 66% in
2000 to 70% in 2005 .
Increase of SC pass rate from 76% in 2001
to 79% in 2005.
Increase of HSC pass rate from 72% in
2001 to 74% in 2005.

4

dated 15

Annex 1
Page S of 12

MAuRITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES

Improve quality and equity of
education system

GOVT POLICIES
Transfer of public funds to
private schools based on clear
and transparent guidelines

MOESR/
PSSA

Focus on leaming outcomes of
poorest children.

MOESR

PARTNERS

Restructured examination
Promotion system
* Abolition of ranking at CPE
Level and introduction of
grading system
* Reduction in drop-out rates

*

|

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
Review of guidelines for the transfer of
funds to private schools and for the
monitoring of these funds.

2003

Achievement of 60% pass rate in CPE
examination in all ZEP schools.

2005

TIMING

Ranking abolished in January 2002 and
implemnentation of grading system
Drop-out rates ofstudents in secondary
schools to less or equal to figures below:
Mts
Rod
F l-m 0o%
0%/
IV
7
14

Review of curriculum in
respond to manpower needs

Compulsory II year schooling in
2005
Programme of construction,
extension and upgrading

MOESR

Introduction of IT in Primary
Schools

MOESR
MOIT

Introduation of IT in Secondary
Schools

5

2005

Enactment oflegislation for 11-year
compulsory schooling
Construction of 17 Secondary Schools
Construction of 6 F VI Colleges

2005

Construction of: (i) 3 Secondary Schools n
Rodrigues; (ii) one F VI College in
Rodrigues

2002-2004
2003

IT curriculum implemented by qualified
teachers in all Primary Schools

2003-2004

IT curriculum implemented by qualified
teachers in all Secondary Schools

2005-2006

2001-2003
2004

Annex I
Page 6 of 12
OBJECTIVES
Improve management and planning

I

MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
GOVT POLICIES
Economic and Financial Analysis
of Education and Training Sector

PARTNERS
MOESR
MEDFSCA
MOF

1. Implementation of Action Plan
for Poverty Alleviation (all
actions include Rodrigues)

Ministry of Finance/Trust Fund for
the Social Integration of Vulnerable
Groups, MEDFSCA

I

TIMING

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
Study to be completed by mid 2002.
Education and Training Sector Note to be
completed by end 2002

Poverty

Reduce poverty through improved
access of the poor to development
tools. (All actions will include
Rodrigues)

Cabinet has already approved the Action
Plan; Coordinating Committee set up to
avoid overlapping of projects/programmes
and ensure coordination among
stakeholders

On-going

Costing and time frame for the activities
outlined in the Action Plan to be worked

Second Semester of 2002.

out

2. Existing Poverty Alleviation
Programmes:- (i) Extension of
micro credit scheme;

Ministries, DBM, New Cooperative
Bank &NGO organisations CSO,
Trust Fund for the Social
Integration of Vulnerable Groups,
Civil Society, A Nou Diboute

No. of beneficiaries ofthese schemes;

Ensam

(ii) Improvement of housing
facilities for the poorest segments

NHDC, MHC

No. of beneficiaries ofhousing schemes;

(iii) Commumity involvement for
project elaboration/Training
opportunities for the poor

Community-based
organisations/Non-Governmental
Organisations, SMIDO, IVTB and
other vocational training centres

No. of CBOs/NGO`s that have benefited
from assistance from any of the existing
poverty alleviation programmes/ No of
school drop-outs at CPE Level/No of
persons who have been trained from
deprived regions/ Number of social
infrastructure put in place under the ANDE
programme or by the Trust Fund or under
the IFAD Community Development

3. Improvement of povertyrelated statistics:- To update the
Relative Development Index
based on the 2000 Housing and

Central Statistics Office

To develop a system of monitoring
improvements in living conditions on a
regular basis and ensuring follow-up with
beneficiaries

of the population

Programme

Population Census

*

6

2002 onwards

Annex I
Page70ofl12
OBJECTIVES

GOVT POLICIES
4. Evaluation of the impact of
expenditure on the poor/ Impact
of Current Poverty Alleviation
Programmes:-With the use of a
proper mechanism, to assess the
effectiveness of all existing
poverty alleviation programmes
5. Special attention is being given
to poverty alleviation and the
broadening of the range of
economic opportunities for lowincome groups in Rodrigues.

MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
PARTNERS
MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
MEDFSCA/Other relevant
A fully comprehensive qualitative and
ministries
quantitative report which would present
the current poverty picture and comment
on the impact of the existing
programmes/expenditure on the poor
people/households
MLG&R, RRA

TIMING
By year 2003

The establishment of the Rodrigues
Regional Assembly (RRA) is expected to
bring improved co-ordination of
development interventions through greater
participation of the local population.

Empowerment of the poor,
especially women, in taking care
of their own development needs:
Upgrading of social infrastructure
Improved access to water
resources
Improved access to micro-finance
Capacity building: Improved
access to education and training
for individuals as well as
grassroots
organisations
gnssroots organisations
Improved co-ordamation of
poverty programmes to maximise
impact

A Committee for the co-ordination of
various poverty alleviation programmes
has been set up.
No. of community development projects
financed
No. of NGOs involved in projects
No. of households who have benefited
from low-cost housing schemes(200 new
bousing uniLsto be set up by2003 and about 150houses

~~~~~~~~~~~~~to
be rehabilituted in Rodrigues)
No.
of persons trained under different

schemes
No. of loans disbursed under micro-credit
schemes
No. of persons involved in off-lagoon
fishing and sea-weed farming
No. of persons having water storage
facilities
%ofchildren under 16 yrs enrolled in
schools/training institutions
No. of Km ofroads/ track roads
consLtucted.

Health

-Improve health services to meet
new health concems, including
non- communicable diseases
-Ensure health sector investment
already funded by budget

Health Sector Financing
Preliminary study for an
insurance scheme to finance
incremental high-cost tertiary
services*

MlHealth, M/Finance, National
Pension Fund, Private Insurance
Companies

Construction ofNonCommunicable Diseases Institute

Chennai Institute
India

National Strategic Plan for
HIV/AIDS

Interninisterial group, NGOs, EPZ,
Hotels

7

White Paper
National Health Insurance Bill
Design of the NHIS system
Introduction of health insurance access
card.
Health insurance scheme
Capital project starts
Institute opens

National AIDS Secretariat operational
Knowledge, Attitudes, Beliefs and
Practices survey on HIV/AIDS to be
carried out

FY 03/04
2002
2005

End 2001
2002

Annex 1
Page 8 of 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES

GOVT POLICIES

PARTNERS

Appoint an Inter-ministerial and
Steering Committee (chaired by
Minister of Social Security) and
technical working groups

_

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES

TIMING

Inter-ministerial and Steering
Committee comprising Ministers of
Social Security, and Economic
Development, FS&CA and
representatives of
Ministries/Departrnents, private
sector and trade unions
Secretariat established at the
MEDFSCA
Lead Advisor attached to
Secretariat
Four Technical Working Groups on
BRP, NPF, Civil Service Pension
and private pension schemes
As above

Inter-ministerial and Steering Committee
and Technical Working Groups set up

May 2002

As above

(i) draft papers on means-tested pension in
three countries; (ii) report from the study
tour/presentation by foreign country
professional; (iii) include additional issues
to be addressed in the final papers

Pension Reform

Ensure that Mauritius pension
system can continue to protect
livelihood aging population

Appoint Lead Advisor
Confirm market value ofNPF
and NSF assets

Technical Working Groups to
come up with proposals for
implementing the reform
programme
Targeting Basic Retirement
Pension
Determine appropriate policy
parameters (target population, level
of benefit, qualify income) for
targeting BRP
Adapt intemational experience of
targeting minimum pensions to a
Mauritius context

(i) Commission papers from three
countries that have means-tested
type of minimum pension
provisions; (ii) undertake more
in-depth study on affluence
(means) testing
Conduct feasibility study to
implement different types of
means- affluence-testing pensions
including analysis on pros and
cons including proposals for
qualification income, financial
impact on the budget, and

May 2003

Report on feasibility study

(i) Draft papers on means-tested mid June 2002
(ii) Final version of papers - mid
July 2002
(iii) Examination of papers in
Mauritius - end July 2002
(iv) Study tour/presentation by
foreign country professional August 2002
(v)
Report
from
Study
tour/presentation
by
foreign
country professional - end August
2002
(vi)
Examination
of legal

administration requirements

implication

Prepare report on
recommendations

feasibility study - mid September
2002
(vii) Cabinet Memorandum - end
of September 2002
(viii) Incorporation in White Paper
on Pension Reforms - November

2002

8

of

proposals

&

Annex 1
Page 9 of 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES
Conversion of point system to
publicly managed filly-funded
defined contributionsystem
Determine the funded status of the

GOVT POLICIES
Update the actuary's evaluation
including impact of the VRS
Calculate the amount of total
contributions accrued with zero

NPF under the current system

real interest

Convert the current NPF to a
defined contribution arrangement
(assume zero real interest on past

Analyse replacement rates of
individuals with different
eamings profile and contributory

contributions)

history

As above

PARTNERS

l

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
Updated balance sheet

TIMING
FY 02/03

As above

Balance Sheet

FY 02/03

As above

Sample calculations

FY 02/03

As above

Sample calculations

FY 02/03
FY 02/03

Examine issues of equity and

Evaluate the financial impact and

adequacy under the converted DC

effects on individuals

system
Design conversion options

Prepare report on
recommendations

As above

Report to bnter-ministerial and Steering
Committee for tentative decisions

Review and revise investment
policy statement using modem
portfolio theory and in
accordance with prudent man's
rule
Establish appropriate benchmarks
for monitoring investment
performance
Study international best practice;
design appropriate structure for
Mauritius; establish a medium to
long term vision to asset
management inMauritius

As above

Draft investment policy statement

As above

Proposal on performance benchmark and
monitoring process

Already in place

As above

Proposal submitted to Inter-ministerial and
Steering Committee for consideration and
tentative decision

Already in place

Investing the NPF/NSFin
accordance with modern portfolio
managementandprudent man 's
rule
Develop an investment policy
statement with the appropriate
asset mix policy that will deliver
the expected return at an acceptable
level of risk
Establish an ongoing process to
monitor the performance of the
portfolio
Insulate the portfolio and
investment committee from
political interference providing an
enabling environment for
committee members and portfolio

NPF/NSF Investment Committee is now an
independent committee and is not subject
to ministerial control in its investment
decision matters.

managers to fulfill their fiduciary

responsibilities

Being updated

Confirm market value of NPF
and NSF assets

As above

Second Semester of 2002

9

Annex 1
Page 10 of 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES
Civil Service Pensions Reform
Determine competitiveness of
public vs. private sector
compensation policies
Design system for new hires and/or
contract workers
Formulate proposal on reform
options for the existing civil
servants and new entrants

GOVT POLICIES
(i) Prepare TOR for comparative
study of total compensation, (ii)
selection of consultants and
comparators
Project potential cash flow under
different scenarios and propose
various design options including
possibility of switch over
provisions for existing staff(see
3-3)
(i) Project potential cash flow
under different scenarios and
incentive mechanisms; (ii)
determine target group for
conversion and harmonize with

PARTNERS

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES
Report on findings of total compensation
survey

TIMING
FY 02/03

As above

Report on cash flow analysis on different
options

FY 02/03

As above

Report on cash flow analysis on different
options

FY 03/04

As above

Document on HR strategy

FY 03/04

As above

|

up front budget constraints

(i) Establish plan to review
overall HR reform within civil
service; (ii) hire consultant

Strengthening the supervision of

Draft legislation to ensure

voluntary and occupational

adequate and advance funding of

schemes
Improve solvency and flexibility of
voluntary and occupational
schemes
Improve supervision and
compliance of voluntary
occupational schemes

benefit liabilities and greater
portability ofbenefits
Establish Financial Supervisory
Agency

As above

Second half of 2002

Second half of 2002
As above

Formulate proposal

Moving towardsan advanced
pension system

Review cumulative impact of all
tentative decisions
Formulate consensus on the
comprehensive reform package

As above

Produce White Paper for national
debate
Finalize the national proposal
Implement the advanced pension
system for 2nd and 3rd pillar
Implement changes to the Ist
pillar
Implement changes to the civil

As above

FY 03/04

As above
As above

FY 03/04
FY 03/04

As above

FY 03/04

As above

FY 04/05

(i) Adjustment of preliminary decisions to
reflect new information gathered
throughout decision process; (ii) agreement
by Inter-ministerial Committee on revised

FY 03/04

decisions

service system

10

Annex 1
Page 11 of 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES

GOVT POLICIES

|

C. PRESERVATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Solid waste

Protect public health and the
natural environment

PARTNERS

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES

TIMING

._.____

Additional disposable facilities
(i) Study to assess feasibility of
extending Mare Chicose
examine
and
Landfill
possibilities of developing
new sites
(ii) Commissioning of a Waste to
Energy Incinerator Plant
(150,000 t/y)
& Legislation
Institutional
Framework
set-up and
(i) Institutional
capacity-building

MoF, MEDFSCA, EU
Ministry ofLocal Government and
Rodrigues
Ministry of Environment
Local Authorities

Study completed
Incinerator built and operational

By second semester 2002
The Waste to Energy Incinerator
Plant is expected to be
commissioned by 2005

Institutional, legal and regulatory
framework in place
New Waste Management Act promulgated

Institutional set-up and capacitybuilding (2002-2005)

(ii) New Waste Management Act

Integrated strategy for hazardous wastes in
place
Pilot compost plant operational

Hazardous waste
(i) Interim storage, incinerator
Waste minimisation
(i) Composting (Pilot compost
plant operational from 2003)

Cost recovery system in place

Cost recovery
(i) Charges for disposal of waste

Liquid Waste
Reduce environmental risk by
befter managing liquid waste

Continue implementation of the
National Sewerage Master Plan
(i) Institutional strengthening
(ii) Expand network
(iii)Increase connection to basic
network
(iv)Assure cost recovery
(v) Create incentives to invest in
cleaner technology

_.

Ministry of Public Utilities
Wastewater Management Authority

Charges for industrial waste will
depend on the promulgation of the
New Waste Management Act
2005).
_
.____ _ __ ___ _(Beyond

(i) Setting up of a Waste Water
Management Authority in September
2001
(ii) Implementation of investment
programme for expansion of network
according to the Sector Policy Letter
(iii) Increase in %of population connected
to central sewerage collection system
from below 20% presently to 40% in
2008
(iv) Introduction of new waste water tariffs
in Jan. 2002 as per Sector Policy Letter
(v) Setting up &equipping of wastewater
laboratory to monitor standards of
effluents discharged

_~~~~~~~~~~~I

Waste Water Management
Authority (WMA) set up in Sep.
2001

Annex I
Page 12 of 12
MAURITIUS CAS MATRIX 2002-2004
OBJECTIVES
Environmental management
Follow principles ofsustainable
development by providing
environmental services,
encouraging responsible
environmental practices and
enforcing appropriate
environmental standards

GOVT POLICIES
Continue implementation of the
National Enviromment Action
Plan in critical areas:
(i) Institutional strengthening
(ii) Strategic land planning
(iii)Biodiversity management
(iv)lntegrated coastal zone
management
(v) Air quality management
(vi) Industrial Management

4

PARTNERS

MONITORABLE OUTCOMES

Ministry of Environment
Stakeholders
(i) New Environmental Protection Act
promulgated
(ii) Revised Town and Country Planning
Act in force and new land development
in conformity with the NPDP
(iii)% of land protected and area of land
under native vegetation weighted by
size and ecological value
(iv) setting up of the ICZM Unit and
implementation of the ICZM Plan
(v) Air quality measurements within
national standards; cases of bronchitis
and asthma
(vi)% of industries conforming to
standards and %of industries with an
accredited Environmental Management
System (EMS)

12

TIMING
Ongoing
Implementation of the National
Environmental Investment
Programme 11started in 2001

Annex 2
Page 1 of 1

Mauritius - External Financial Requirements and Sources (US$ million) 1/
1998/99

1999/00

Actuals

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

Estimated -------------------------- Projected----------------------

Requirements
Current account deficit
(excluding transfers)
Amortizationpayments
Changes in net reserves

278.7

389.3

391.3

234.1

207.0

229.1

212.8

156.8
94.1
27.8

164.7
140.7
83.9

-1.3
207.6
185.1

7.6
103.8
122.7

41.0
143.0
23.0

58.9
111.0
59.2

54.8
105.0
53.0

Resources
Transfers
of which: official
Loans
o.w. Financing gap
o.w. PERL
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio and other capital
Errors and omissions

278.7
91.4
5.4
133.7

389.3
96.0
6.3
78.4

391.3
78.9
7.2
111.2

18.8
10.8
24.0

12.7
-32.7
235.0

223.4
-6.7
-15.4

234.1
84.8
9.8
138.3
40.0
40.0
30.0
-19.0
0.0

207.0
87.6
9.5
99.3
40.3
0.0
30.0
-10.0
0.0

229.1
91.1
9.5
113.0
53.5
40.0
35.0
-10.0
0.0

212.8
94.6
9.5
88.3
55.3
0.0
40.0
-10.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

Changes in arrears
New arrears
Debt reduction

Source: Government of Mauritius; and, World Bank staff estimates and projections.
1/ Refers to fiscal year starting in July I through June 30.
3/25/2002

Annex 3
Page 1 of 1

Mauritius - Summary of Government Finances 1/
(In billions of Rupees)
1998/99
1999/00
2000/01
2001/02
2002/03
2003/04
2004/05
Actuals
Estimated -------------------------- Projected---------------------Total Revenues and grants

20.8

23.0

22.7

25.3

29.4

33.2

37.5

Tax revenue
Non-tax revenue
Total revenue
Extemal grants

17.9
2.8
20.7
0.1

20.6
2.2
22.8
0.2

20.2
2.3
22.5
0.2

21.5
3.4
25.0
0.3

25.6
3.5
29.1
0.3

29.2
3.7
32.9
0.3

33.1
4.0
37.1
0.3

Total expenditure and net lending

24.9

27.8

30.8

34.3

38.2

42.0

45.4

Current expenditures
Current expenditure on goods and services
Wages and salaries
Other goods and services
Interest payments
External interest
Internal interest
Current transfers and subsidies

21.8
9.6
7.5
2.2
3.6
0.5
3.1
8.6

23.4
10.1
7.8
2.4
3.9
0.5
3.4
9.4

26.3
10.9
8.2
2.7
5.1
0.4
4.7
10.3

27.5
11.6
8.6
3.0
4.6
0.2
4.4
11.3

30.9
13.3
9.8
3.5
5.4
0.3
5.1
12.3

34.0
14.5
10.8
3.7
6.2
0.4
5.8
13.2

36.8
15.5
11.7
3.8
6.9
0.5
6.4
14.4

3.0

4.4

4.5

6.7

7.2

8.1

8.6

Overall balance after grants 2/

-3.5

-4.3

-8.1

-9.0

-9.1

-9.2

-8.3

Financing
Extemal, net
Disbursements
o.w. PERL
Amortization
Domestic
Banking System ,net
Not-bank, net

3.5
-1.2
0.5
0.0
1.6
4.7
-1.6
6.3

4.3
-0.5
0.4
0.0
0.9
4.8
2.5
2.4

8.1
-3.6
0.4
0.0
3.9
11.7
-1.1
12.8

9.0
1.2
1.9
1.2
0.7
7.8
2.0
5.8

9.1
2.2
3.2
0.0
1.0
6.9
1.9
5.0

9.2
2.4
3.1
1.3
1.0
6.8
2.0
4.8

8.3
0.2
0.6
0.0
1.1
8.2
2.2
6.0

Memo item:
GrossDometicProduct

103.6

112.9

124.2

138.1

151.6

167.6

Capital expenditure and net lending

Source: Govemment of Mauritius; and, World Bank staff estimates and projections.
1/ Refers to fiscal year starting in July I through June 30.
2/ Consolidated central government. If NIDF (National Infrastructure Development Fund) reimbursement to Government is
included in the Government Accounts, the overall fiscal deficit comes to 5.7% in 2000/01.
3/25/2002

184.4

Annex 4
Page 1 of 1

Mauritius - Summary of Government Finances 1/
(As percent of GDP)
1998/99
1999/00
2000/01
2001/02
2002/03
2003/04
Actuals
Estimated -Projected----------------------

2004/05

Total Revenues and grants

20.1

20.4

18.3

18.3

19.4

19.8

20.3

Tax revenue
Non-tax revenue
Total revenue
External grants

17.3
2.7
20.0
0.1

18.3
2.0
20.2
0.1

16.3
1.9
18.1
0.2

15.6
2.5
18.1
0.2

16.9
2.3
19.2
0.2

17.4
2.2
19.6
0.2

17.9
2.2
20.1
0.2

Total expenditure and net lending

24.0

24.6

24.8

24.8

25.2

25.1

24.6

Current expenditures
Current expenditure on goods and services
Wages and salaries
Other goods and services
Interest payments
Extemal interest
Internal interest
Current transfers and subsidies

21.1
9.3
7.2
2.1
3.5
0.5
3.0
8.3

20.7
9.0
6.9
2.1
3.4
0.4
3.0
8.3

21.2
8.8
6.6
2.2
4.1
0.3
3.8
8.3

19.9
8.4
6.2
2.1
3.4
0.2
3.2
8.2

20.4
8.8
6.4
2.3
3.5
0.2
3.3
8.1

20.3
8.7
6.4
2.2
3.7
0.2
3.5
7.9

20.0
8.4
6.3
2.1
3.7
0.3
3.5
7.8

2.9

3.9

3.6

4.9

4.8

4.8

4.7

Overall balance after grants 2/

-3.4

-3.8

-6.6

-6.5

-6.0

-5.5

-4.5

Financing
External, net
Disbursements
o.w. PERL
Amortization
Domestic
Banking System ,net
Not-bank, net

3.4
-1.1
0.4

3.8
-0.5
0.4

6.6
-2.9
0.3

1.6
4.5
-1.5
6.0

0.8
4.3
2.2
2.1

3.1
9.4
-0.9
10.3

6.5
0.9
1.4
0.9
0.5
5.6
1.4
4.2

6.0
1.5
2.1
0.0
0.6
4.6
1.2
3.3

5.5
1.4
1.9
0.8
0.6
4.1
1.2
2.9

4.5
0.1
0.3
0.0
0.6
4.4
1.2
3.3

Capital expenditure and net lending

Source: Government of Mauritius; and, World Bank staff estimates and projections.
1/ Refers to fiscal year starting in July I through June 30.
2/ Consolidated central government. If NIDF (National Infrastructure Development Fund) reimbursement to Government is
included in the Govemment Accounts, the overall fiscal deficit comes to 5.7% in 2000/01.
3/25/2002

Annex Al
Page I of 1
Mauritius
Key Economic & Program Indicators - Change from Last CAS
As Of Date 0312512002
Forecast in Last CAS a
Economy (CY)
Growth rates (%)
GDP f
Exports
Imports

1995c

1996d

1997d

Actual b
1998d

1998/99e

Current CAS Forecast b

1999/00e 2000101c 2001/02d 2002/03d 2003/04d

4.3
5.7
-3.5

6.1
6.2
6.0

5.5
5.6
5.5

5.7
5.8
5.6

5.3
4.8
6.0

2.6
-2.0
1.3

7.2
5.5
1.4

5.3
2.7
3.8

4.6
2.0
3.8

5.5
3.7
3.8

6.0

7.3

5.2

4.1

7.9

5.3

4.4

6.0

5.5

5.0

National accounts (%GDP)
Current account balance
Gross investment

-0.3
24.5

-2.0
24.9

-2.0
26.1

-1.0
27.0

-1.6
26.0

-1.6
25.7

1.8
24.4

1.7
25.1

1.0
25.8

0.6
26.0

Public finance (%GDP)
Fiscal balance g
Foreign financing

-6.1
1.8

-6.0
0.1

-4.8
0.5

-3.8
0.3

-3.4
-1.1

-3.8
-0.5

-6.6
-2.9

-6.5
0.9

-6.0
1.5

-5.5
1.4

2.4

3.1

3.3

3.8

3.7

3.7

Inflation (%)

Intemational reserves h

..

..

..

..

(as months of imports)

Program (Bank's FY) I
Lending ($million)
Gross disbursements ($million)

FY97c
0
12.2

FY98d
22.0
23.6

FY99d
20.0
9.5

FYOOd

FY99e
0
3.4

FYOOe
0
9.0

FY01c
4.8
2.2

Sources: Govemment of Mauritius; IMF; World Bank staff estimates and projections.
a. Calendar year.
b. Fiscal year starting in July 1 through June 30.
c. Estimated year.
d. Projected year.
e. Actual outcome.
f. GDP at factor cost growth rate was 3 and 8 percent for 99/00 and 00/01, respectively.
g. If NIDF (National Infrastructure Development Fund) reimbursement to Govemment is included in the
Govemment Accounts, the overall fiscal deficit comes to 5.7% in 2000/01.
h. Gross intemational reserves of monetary authorities as months of imports of goods and all services.
I. For Bank Fiscal years, for example, FYOO refers to fiscal year ending in June 30, 2000.

FY02d
0
4.9

FY03d
40
45

FY04d
0
3

40
42

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Mauritius at a glance 1/
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2000
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Mauritius

SubSaharan
Africa

Uppermiddleincome

1.2
3,800
4.6

659
480
313

647
4,620
2,986

1.1
1.6

2.6
2.6

1.3
2.0

3/28/02

Development dlamond
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994400
Population (%/6)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199440)
Poverty (%of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (%of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (%of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (%of population)
Illiteracy (%of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (%ofschoolage population)
Male

41
71
17
15

34
47
92
..

..

..

15
106
106

55
38
78
85

87
10
107
106

106

71

105

1980

1990

1999

2000

1.2

2.8

4.4

4.5

Gross domestic investmentUGDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GOP

23.0
47.3
12.7
11.9

29.3
63.4
23.9
27.2

25.7
63.3
23.7
25.1

24.4
63.7
25.3
27.2

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debtGDP
Total debt service/exports

-14.8
2.4
42.2
13.3

-1.5
1.6
35.9
8.5

-1.6
1.3
41.1
12.3

1.8
1.2
38.7
11.5

1980-90

199040

1999

2000

200044

6.3
5.3
10.9

5.1
3.9
5.2

2.6
1.3
-2.0

7.2
6.1
5.5

5.1
4.2
3.1

Female

GNI
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

..

76I
69
28
Access to improved water source
-Mauriius
Upper-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

GDP (US$ billions)

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Economic ratlos'

Trade
Oomsti
Investment

Domestic
savings
Indebtedness

Mauritius
Upper-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1980

1990

1999

2000

(%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Growth of lnvestment and GDP (h)
20

14.3
25.5
16.0
60.2

12.3
33.1
24.3
54.6

5.9
31.6
24.0
62.5

6.3
31.2
23253.
62.5

15

Private consumption
General govemment consumption

72.5
14.8

63.4
12.7

63.1
13.2

61.7
13.0

Imports of goods and services

57.5

68.8

65.3

62.8

(average annual growth)

10
0

-s

_

96

97

98

99

.

GDP

00

-1e

-GD1
_

1980-90

1990-00

1999

2000

Growth of exports and Imports (/)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

2.1
9.8
10.6
5.3

-0.4
5.4
5.3
6.3

-23.3
5.8
4.8
5.2

25.9
7.0
6.6
6.7

15
1-

Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Gross domestic investment

6.2
3.5
12.6

5.5
4.8
4.5

4.1
5.9
5.1

5.5
6.1
1.4

0
-5

Imports of goods and services

12.6

5.2

1.3

1.4

97

Exports

9a

oo

e--mports

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
1/ This MG has been produced based on fiscal year data. For example, the year 2000 refers to FY starting in Julyl, 2000 and ending in June 30, 20'
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2

Page 2 of 2

Mauritius
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1980

1990

1999

2000

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices
(%change)

Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

10

a

26.5
10.6

12.8
8.9

5.3
6.1

4.4
2.6

6-

Govemment ffnance

24*
.

(OA
of GDP, includes current grants)

o.

Current revenue

21.7

22.8

20.4

18.3

Current budget balance

-4.2

2.8

-0.3

Overall surplus/deficit 1/

-13.6

-1.7

-3.8

-2.9
-8.6

95

97

g6

GDP deflator

9s

00

g9

ZeCPI

I

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Sugar
Manufactures
Total imports (df)
Food

Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1980

1990

1999

2000

361
207
116
628

1.261
354
784
1,608

1,523
213
1,171
2,158

1.633
267
1,177
2,056

165

190

299

291

1I00_

87
98

127
426

151
653

236
465

SW
o

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)

..

91
92

83
87

80
86

Terms of trade (1995= 100)

..

98

96

94

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)
2sco
20000
5

j j j j j j j
_
1

94

95

go

67

* Exports

99

98

00

* Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)

1980

1990

1999

2000

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

491
659
-168

1,765
1.901
-135

2,605
2,735
-130

2,784
2,787
-2

3

-34
24

5
88

-35
96

Net income
Net current transfers

2

3
79

o
-2
;3

Current account balance

-177

-42

-69

80

Financing Items (net)
Changes in net reserves

172
5

206
-165

153
84

105
-185

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, localWS)

92
8.0

741
14.9

688
25.5

790
27.6

1980

1990

1999

2000

506

1.014

1.819

1,741

45

172

96

77

20

19

14

13

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

70
4
0

164
31
0

348
26
1

347
22
1

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment

0
43
21
1

-1
52
37
24

0
14
-113
13

-1
14
-1668
223

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments

18
15
2

29
6
18

5
2
20

0
5
18

Net flows

13

-12

-18

-13

Interest payments
Net transfers

3
11

14
-26

6
-24

5
-18

9

4

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(USS millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
lBRD
IDA

Composition of 2000 debt (USS mill.)
.

.>

t".;

A- IBRD
B- IDA
C-IMF

D-Other multilateral

a

E- Bilateral
F-Private
G -Short-temm

Development Economics
4/12/02
1/ If NIDF (National Infrastructure Development Fund) reimbursement to Govemment is induded in the Govemment Accounts, the overall
fisral deficit comes to 5.7% In 2000/01.

Annex B2
1 of I

c1ilPage

CAS Annex B2 - Mauritius
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 3/25/2002

1999

2000

2001

2002

4
2.7

3
3.1

3
4.1

3
3

Percent of Problem Projects by Number c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount as d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

25.1

8.2

25.7

12.7

No
365,500
80,000

No
215,680
70,000

No
213,140
70,000

No
313,800
100,000

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation
Average Implementation Period (years) b

H

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
6
26
38.4
282.4
19.2
0
0
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
AJI indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary

Mauritius

Page 1 of 1

As of 3125/2002
Proposed IBRD/IDA Base and High Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year

Base Case
2002
2004

Proj ID

US$(M4)

PERL
PERL
Total

PERL
PERL
PERL
Total

Strategic Rewards b
(HIMDL)

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

40.0
40.0
80.0

H
H

M
M

40.0
40.0
40.0
120.0

H
H
H

M
M
M

High Case
2002
2003
2004

a. This table presents the proposed program for the FYo2-04.

Annex B3 (IFC/MIGA)
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Mauritius
As of April 1, 2002

Mauritius - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2002
1999 2000 2001 2002
EFC approvals (US$m)

0

0

0

0

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

0

0-

0

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services As Of Date 03/25/2002

Product

Completion FY Cost (US$000)

Audience"

Objective b

Recent completions
Pension Reform

FY02

50

Government

Knowledge

FY02

35

Bank

Knowledge

FY03
FY03

35
95

Government
Government

Knowledge
Knowledge

FY03
FY04
FY05

150
170
150

Public Dissemination
Public Dissemination
Public Dissemination

Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge

FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05

100
75
80
50

Public Dissemination
Public Dissemination
Public Dissemination
Public Dissemination

Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge

Underway
ESW

CPAR
Policy Papers

Transport Action Plan
Education Sector Note
Planned
ESW

PER
Social Welfare
CEM
Policy Papers (with partners)

Labor Market review
Informal Economy & Taxation
Health Study
Gender Assessment

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Mauritius Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group
UppermiddleIncome

1970-75

1980-85

1993-00

SubSaharan
Africa

0.9
1.5
43.4
3.1

1.0
1.0
41.4
2.3

1.2
1.1
41.1
2.0

642.8
2.6
33.8
5.3

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

..

..

..

..

..

..

3,800
130
127

490
131

4,870
131

1.7
4.1
..

3.3
5.0
7.9

..

94

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (%annual average for period)
Urban population (%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(%ofpopulation)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=1 00)
Food price index (1995=1 00)
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini Index
Lowest quintile (%of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an Improved water source
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(%under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (%under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

780
15
..

4.5
55.0

1,060
50
48

..
..

3.6
6.3

3.8
4.1

1.8
4.6
5.0

80
81
80

101
100
101

98
98
98

..

99
100
98

100
100
100

55
82
41

87
94
68

..

61

..

85

57
59

90
88

..

24

79
85
15

64
62
67

68
65
71

71
67
75

47
46
48

69
66
73

45
86

26
40

17
23

92
161

27
34

268
205

247
181

207
113
50
97

499
453

233
143

..

..
..

..
..

..

..

81

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.
2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Anmex B6
Page I of 2

Mauritius - Key Economic Indicators
As Of Date 03/2512002

Indicator

Actual
1998/99
1999/00

Estimate
2000/01

2001/02

Projected
2002/03
2003i04

2004/Q5

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product a!
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100.0
8.6
31.5
59.9

100.0
5.9
31.6
62.5

100.0
6.3
31.2
62.5

100.0
6.5
31.1
62.4

100.0
6.0
31.7
62.3

100.0
5.8
31.7
62.5

100.0
5.8
31.7
62.5

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

76.2
25.5
6.3
19.1

76.3
25.6
6.5
19.1

74.7
23.5
6.9
16.6

74.7
25.1
8.7
16.4

74.9
25.8
8.8
17.0

75.2
26.0
9.0
17.0

74.8
26.3
8.8
17.5

Exports (GNFS) b/
Imports (GNFS)

65.0
67.3

63.3
65.3

63.7
62.8

63.0
62.8

62.2
62.9

62.0
63.2

62.5
63.6

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings c/

23.8
25.4

23.7
25.1

25.3
27.2

25.3
26.8

25.1
26.8

24.8
26.6

25.2
27.1

4175

4424

4500

4537

4724

4975

5216

3750

3640

4110

4120

4060

4170

4330

2.6
4.8

7.2
7.5

5.3
5.2

4.6
4.6

5.5
5.1

5.3
5.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
4.2
1.3
Total consumption
7.5
3.1
Private consumption
8.3
2.8

6.1
4.5
4.4

4.5
4.3
4.3

3.6
3.9
3.3

4.5
4.2
4.4

4.3
3.3
3.7

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
5.3
Gross Domestic Income
6.6

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS) b/
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b/
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Other capital (net, inc. errors & ommissio
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (%of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR92 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary(sugar)
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

2649
1680
2782
2046
-133
91
-65

2605
1523
2735
2006
-130
96
-69

2784
1633
2787
1912
-2
79
80

2858
1639
2847
1922
10
85
77

2938
1649
2974
2003
-35
88
47

3086
1732
3144
2130
-58
91
32

3262
1831
3318
2257
-57
95
40

19
40
35
-28

13
-62
202
-84

223
-96
-22
-185

30
99
-84
-123

30
32
-86
-23

35
23
-31
-59

40
13
-40
-53

-3.2

-2.9

0.0

0.2

-0.7

-1.2

-1.1

8.4
3.7
12.0
7.7

-5.1
-39.0
4.3
1.6

11.5
49.0
4.0
-4.5

2.0
14.3
1.0
3.9

0.7
-18.0
4.5
4.1

4.1
0.7
5.0
4.4

4.8
0.0
6.0
4.2

.

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Mauritius - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

Actual
1998.99
l 999:r0o

Estimate
2.00001

2001/02

Proiected
2002'03
2')3 1"4

201'4',l4

Public flnance (as % of GDP at market prices) e/
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
GrowthofM2(%)
Private sectorcredit growth/
total credit growth (%)
Price Indices( YR92 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchangerate (US$/LCU)f/
Real interest rates (one year term deposit)
Consumer price index (%change)
GDP deflator (%change)

20.1
21.1
-1.0
2.9
-1.1

20.4
20.7
-0.3
3.9
-0.5

18.3
21.2
-2.9
3.6
-2.9

18.3
19.9
-1.6
4.9
0.9

19.2
20.4
-1.2
4.8
1.5

19.6
20.3
-0.7
4.8
1.4

20.1
20.0
0.2
4.7
0.1

77.4
13.2
157.2

78.8
10.9
95.2

78.7
9.9
152.4

78.6
11.1
83.3

78.5
9.6
100.0

78.4
10.4
100.0

78.3
9.9
100.0

97.0
100.0
97.0
97.6

92.5
97.5
95.0
103.2

89.0
97.3
91.5
106.1

87.6
94.5
92.6
102.6

87.5
94.6
92.4

88.2
96.5
91.5

89.0
98.1
90.7

4.1
7.9
5.0

5.5
5.3
6.1

7.0
4.4
2.6

5.8
6.0
5.6

5.0
5.8
5.0

4.0
5.0
4.8

4.0
4.7
4.5

a. Shares refer to GDP at factor cost. Growth rate of GDP at facor cost was 3 and 8 percent in 99/00 and 00/01, respectively.
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e/ Consolidated central government. If NIDF (National Infrastructure Development Fund) reimbursement to Government is
included in the Government Accounts, the overall fiscal deficit comes to 5.7% in 2000/01.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes depreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Mauritius - Key Exposure Indicators
As Of 0312512002

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

Actual
Estimate
1998/99 1999/00 2000/01
1,873

1,819

1,741

2001/02
1,789

Projected
2002/03
2003/04
1,748

1,720

2004/05
1,703

47

-12

-86

34

-43

2

-17

227

348

347

223

188

153

144

65.3
44.9
7.9
17.9

64.4
41.1
12.3
18.1

57.7
38.7
11.5
18.1

58.4
39.4
7.3
18.7

55.5
37.0
6.0
20.1

52.1
34.6
4.6
21.6

48.9
32.7
4.1
21.5

14.2
23.6

6.8
15.7

5.7
11.7

7.4
18.7

9.0
22.2

13.1
27.7

14.6
27.7

0.9
110

0.9
96

0.7
77

0.5
108

0.5
100

0.6
131

0.5
123

0.1
14

0.1
14

0.1
13

0.1
13

0.1
12

0.1
12

0.1
11

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRDTDO(US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of BRD portfolio (%)
IDATDO(US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA

M IGA guarantees iLUSSm)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 of I
CAS Annox 90 - Mauritius
Optteans Portfdlio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 03126i2002
Closed Projec

IBRDDA '
(Active)
Tot Disbursed
of whichhas beenrepaid
(Closed)
TotiaDisbursed
of whichhasbeenrepaid
(Active Caosed)
TotalDisbursed
hasbeenrepa!d
of ewhidc
(Acive)
TotalUndisbursed
(Closed)
Tottl Undisbursed
(Acive . Cosed)
TotalUndisbuased

34

7.60
0.00
333.20
321.00
340.77
321.03
11.22
0.00
11.22

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Active Prolecto
'ast PSR

Project ID
P001921
P066198
P073594
TOTAL

Project Name
Env.Sewerage&Sanitation
Financial Sec. Infrastructure
Financiial Sec. Supervisory Auth.

ent
eo
Objectives
S
S
S

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

emnon
Pras
S
S
S

Disbursemento w

OrlQlnal Amount In US$ Mllilons

Supervislon Ratng
Fiscal Ycar
1998
2000
2002

IBRD
12.4
4.8
1.8
19

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.
7.2
2.2
1.8
11.2

OrIg. Frm Rfd
6.5
1.8
0
8.3

Annex B8 (IFC)
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Mauritius
Mauritius
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 2/28/2002
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval
1991
1996
1986

Disbursed

Company
Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
AEFCSL
0 0.19
0
0
0 0.19
0
0
MVCF
0
1.44
0
0
0
1.44
0
0
SocotaTextile
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Total Portfolio:

0

1.63

0

0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan Equity Quasi Partic

0

1.63

0

0

Annex B10
Page 1of 1

CAS Annex BIO - Mauritius
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
As of 312512002

Network area

Country
performnancea

Major issueb

Country
priorityC

BankpriorityC

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction
Economic policy
Public sector
Gender

Good
Good
Good
Good

Better tools for the poor
Increase competitiveness/productivity
Civil service reform
Increase the role of women in public sector

High
High
Moderate
Moderate

High
High
Moderate
Moderate

Human Development Department
Education
Health, nutrition & population
Social protection

Fair
Good
Fair

Access to and quality of education
Modernization of the health system
Retargeting of social assistance

High
Low
Moderate

High
Low
Moderate

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development

Excellent
Good
Fair

Restructure nonsugar sector
More efficient waste management
Improve social development and cohesion

Moderate
Moderate
High

Moderate
Moderate
High

Strengthen financial sector
Liberalization of telecoms sector
n/a
Alternative source of transport

High
Moderate

High
Moderate

High

High

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Excellent
Private sector
.
Good
Energy & mining
Good
Infrastructure/Transport
Good

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use 'low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank priorities d

IBRD24629

RITIUS
MAUI
HE',' :_.''KLn

'*,

1.

MiEF M"I'Jr

/

,,;

N
EP,
pEF.E:i':f.-ND[,sI.Ei)

-

.

-

-

*rE r TCwr Lr -f_F'

-

.

;|/|

r.lT:'l.:~, is ;~FIT-~I.

S,l

Ia'

I

I-

I

It~~,;

-

0

_I

itfr 1_11

I DI ird

_

I..'

'>.-L'

-

-

I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~HL

\

-1

F-

ST

-

-~~

\4

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~

-

L-.

.}1..

t-

1

I

I

:t .-EHI - ,l..'
..;X
.. je
:
-...
.
-I ,,:. a -r

.d
S;t.,'.

': ., ' { '-1'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~''''~4l.

3 II

.I L

o *l--F:.-- I -4-.cH.ff.:

At J

;

;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~D

.,,.,

I--

rt 'c,IJ
:.
5. l;

0- :nrF

,nI.I: .S

-

I

.li,'ssvr

I

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.fl

I

V-

t
t
a.-.
H U 0C2epa,-.:
e
!,

__

-

D.-

:993

.

-

-.
.

... Is

..
-

i

;

-I

.

.

............ ' , ,

__

1993
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

