Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

88941 v4

RWANDA

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FY2014-2018

Annex 1: Results Matrix

EDPRS 2 Goal: Sustain Rapid Economic Growth and Facilitate the Process of Economic Transformation by Increasing the Internal and External
Connectivity of the Rwandan Economy.

Country Development
Goals
Access to adequate and
reliable electricity services
is key to Rwanda’s
economic growth by
increasing enterprises’
productivity and
competitiveness and job
creation.
Increased electricity
generation capacity to 563
MW, with private sector
investment.
Accelerated access to
electricity, water, roads, and
land to priority sectors of
the economy and/or large
investors.

Development Challenges

CPS Objectives and Outcome Indicators

Bank and Partner Program

Theme 1: Accelerating economic growth that is private-sector driven and job-creating
Lack of sufficient electricity
1. Increased generation and access to electricity
Financing
supply is handicapping business Outcome Indicators
Ongoing:
and reducing growth.
Indicator 1: Installed Generation Capacity (MW)
1. Regional Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric Project
Continued investments in
Baseline [2013]: 110 MW
2. Increased Access to Electricity
power generation facilities will
Target [end of FY18]: 250 MW
3. Governance for Competitiveness TA Project
increase the reliability and
Indicator 2: National Access to Electricity (%)
(G4C)
lower the cost of electricity,
Baseline [2013]:18%
MIGA: Lake Kivu Methane Generation Project
thus contributing to the
Target [end of FY18]: 35%
Planned/Proposed:
achievement of the country’s
Milestones
IDA
economic development goals.
1. Electricity Sector Strengthening Project
Generation Capacity
Improving the quality of supply i. Developers/contractors for the construction of power 2. Rusizi Regional Project
of electricity will lower costs
plants selected
3. Support to Private Power Generation (IDA
and improve the profitability of ii. Finance Close attained/public funding secured
PRG and MIGA Guarantees, IFC loans as
business enterprises. At the
iii. Power plants’ construction progress
well as other WBG financial products)
same time, the ability of public
iv. Generation capacity (MW) commissioned
IFC
institutions, e.g. hospitals and
1. At least one IPP committed or PPP mandate
Electricity Access
schools, to deliver quality
i. National Electrification Plan prepared
signed.
services will be enhanced.
ii. Funding secured
2. IFC IC: Support to RDB, RURA, and
iii. Annual work plans
MININFRA to strengthen capacity to deal
iv. Annual cumulative connections
with renewable energy proposals; improving
IFC:
the FIT in hydro, solar and small scale
Indicator 1: Support new Generation Capacity of 100
biomass; development of regulations for
MW
third party (open) access to private and/or
Indicator 2: MW generated through hydro and solar
captive power.
Baseline [2013]: Hydro: 110 MW, Solar: 0
AAA/ESW
Target [end of FY18]:210 MW,
1. Energy Sector Performance Review (Public
Sector Expenditure Review)
2. Increased Electricity Access Impact
Evaluation

1

Country Development
Goals
Physical development
planning and economic
development combined and
coordination of all
development sectors
strengthened.
A network of cities and
urban centers created that
provide services and attract
economic activities
countrywide.

Development Challenges

CPS Objectives and Outcome Indicators

Bank and Partner Program

Addressing the challenge of
urban planning and providing
municipal services to that that
move from rural areas in
response to economic growth
and improved incomes.

2. Development plans for secondary cities
developed
Outcome Indicators
Indicator 1: Urban planning and management
guidelines for secondary cities developed and adopted
IFC
Indicator 1: Funding mechanisms for affordable
housing developed

Financing
Ongoing: None

Increased private sector
investment and financing

Small and nascent private
sector, constrained by a
number of factors: limited
access to finance, low skills,
etc.

3. Improved environment for private sector
investments.
Outcome Indicators
Indicator 1: On-line construction permitting at
secondary cities
Baseline [2013]: 0
Target [end of FY18]: 3
Indicator 2: Improvement in competition policy
performance indicators
Baseline [2013]: 0
Target [end of FY18]: 3
IFC:
Indicator 1: Enabling environment for PPPs established
Indicator 2: Raise Financial Market commitment
volumes to $80 million through 2017
Indicator 3: Local currency issuance
Milestones
i. # of training workshops
ii. improved feedback from private sector
iii. # of reforms to competition policy framework
iv. # of best practice measures adopted in public
procurement processes
v. indicators of improved transparency of investment

Accelerated structural
changes in the financial
sector, in particular to
increase long term savings
and access to international
finance.
Strengthened business
environment through
regulatory reform to spur
medium and large investors
in priority and emerging
sectors of the economy.

Planned/Proposed:
IDA: Urban Development Project
IFC:
1. IT-based activities to cities across the
country as part of its investment climate
work
2. Financing and advice for mortgage system
and housing developers
3. C3P advise Kigali Water project
AAA/ESW
Planned
1.Urban Sector Note
Financing
Ongoing: G4C, IFC Advisory Services
IFC Investment Services, ICA
IFC IC:
1. Use of IT solutions to improve predictability
and cost of government services to business
2.Targeted support for investment promotion
in agribusiness (tea and horticulture) and
tourism
AAA/ESW
Ongoing
1.NLTA on Competition Policy
Planned/Proposed:
1.NLTA on PPP legal and institutional
framework and capacity building
2.Financial Sector Strengthening and Inclusion

2

Country Development
Goals

Development Challenges

CPS Objectives and Outcome Indicators

Bank and Partner Program

incentives
4. Increased integration into the EAC regional
Financing
Ongoing: EATTFP, RCIP , G4C, FSDP2,
markets.
Outcome Indicators
FIRST, and Advisory Services
Indicator 1: Number of tourist arrivals from EAC
markets.
Planned/Proposed:
Baseline[2012]: 362,433
IFC: Advisory Services, ICA
Target [end of FY18]: 521,904
IFC:
Indicator 1: One tax administration project
Indicator 2: Dispute resolution framework
Indicator 3: Launch business licensing portal
Theme 2: Improving the productivity and incomes of the poor through rural development and social protection
Increased productivity and
Agricultural smallholders
5. Improved agriculture productivity and
Financing
sustainability of agriculture. dominate the scarce land
Ongoing: RSSP3, LWH, LVEMP
sustainability
available; and the smaller the
Outcome Indicators
land holding, the poorer the
Indicator 1: Marshland and Hillside area under
Planned/Proposed:
land holder is more likely to be. irrigation
IDA: Agric. P4R
36% of households own 6% of
Baseline [2013]: 25,490 ha
IFC:
farm land, with an average of
Target [end of FY18]: 40,000 ha
1. Direct IFC financing for aggregators, and
only 0.11 ha per household.
Indicator 2: Area of land developed with progressive,
commercial farms. Indirect support for small
bench or radical terraces
farms.
Baseline [2013]: 848,538 ha
2. Advice to financial institutions, public
Target [end of FY18]: 1,050,000 ha
sector, PPPs.
Milestones
3. Support enhanced public private dialogue to
i. Annual increases of irrigated area (ha)
support investment and growth in export
ii. Annual increases in terraced land area (ha)
sectors.
IFC:
AAA/ESW
Indicator 1: $15 million-$20 million in financing
Ongoing: Agriculture Policy Note, Rwanda
Land Sector Study
Planned/Proposed:
1. Financial Sector Strengthening and
Inclusion

Transformed logistics
system with a strategic
focus on exports.

Rwanda’s internal trade and
competitiveness of exports are
constrained by high transport
costs and an insufficient
logistics system.

3

Country Development
Goals

Better linkages between
large firms and small firms

Development Challenges

CPS Objectives and Outcome Indicators

Bank and Partner Program

Smallholder farmers face
numerous challenges along the
entire agriculture production
chain: limited market
information, skills, financing,
etc.

6. Improved access of rural /small farmers to
inputs, financing, and markets.
Outcome Indicators
Indicator 1: Provide $15 million-$20 million in
agriculture sector loans/financing
Indicator 2: Access to crop and livestock insurance (of
which, to women).
Indicator 3: Number of smallholder farms that meet
new market standards for selected products (of which,
# women)
Milestones
i. Annual percent increase in agriculture sector loans.
ii. Annual increases in crop/livestock insurance
policies.
7. Improved agriculture value chains
Outcome Indicators
Indicator 1: Production of priority food crops
increased.
Baselines [2013]:
Maize
573,038 MT
Wheat
75,913 MT
Rice
84,079 MT
Beans
452,828MT
Irish potatoes
2,172,421MT
Cassava
2,716,421 MT
Targets [end of FY18]:
Maize
1,696,239 MT
Wheat
287,760MT
Rice
188,760 MT
Beans
749,381MT
Irish potatoes
4,001,225MT
Cassava
3,826,748MT
Indicator 2: Increase of value addition captured within
country for coffee and tea export crops.
Baseline [2013]: Coffee – 35%, tea – 25%
Target [end of FY18]: Coffee – 55%, tea – 40%
Indicator 3: Number of horticulture cooperatives with
linkages to global firms Increase of value addition.

Financing
Ongoing: RSSP3, LWH, LVEMP, IFC
Advisory Services/Investments
Planned/Proposed:
IDA: Agric. P4R
IFC:
1. Financing and advice to financial institutions
2. Investment in horticulture (tea)
AAA/ESW
Ongoing: Agriculture Policy Note, Rwanda
Land Sector Study

Financing
Ongoing: RSSP, LWH, G4C, IFC
Investment/Advisory Services
Planned/Proposed:
IDA: Agriculture P4R
IFC: Financing for aggregators and
commercial farms. Advice for branding,
traceability, certification for horticulture

4

Country Development
Goals

Quality road network and
rural feeder roads extended
and in good condition

Enhanced rural settlements
which facilitate access to
basic services, farm and offfarm economic activities
through integrated district
land use plans.

Expand social protection
coverage of the poor

Harmonized social
protection interventions to

1

Development Challenges

Addresses access and
connectivity of rural areas, in
the selected districts, and
enhances the development
impacts of investments in
agriculture.

Rwanda is predominantly rural
with around 1.4 million
hectares of arable land. Nearly
98% of total land area is
categorized as rural, with
around 54% classified as arable
and the urban area being only
1.5% of total country surface1.
Addresses the need for better
rural land use planning.
Limited coverage of the poor
by social protection, notably the
flagship Vision Umurenge
Program (VUP).
Fragmented social assistance

CPS Objectives and Outcome Indicators
Baseline [2013]: 1
Target [end of FY18]: 15
Milestones
i. Annual increase in production of food crops.
ii. Annual increase in percentage of fully washed
coffee.
iii. Annual increase in percentage of tea direct sales
versus the Mombasa Auction.
8. Improved rural roads condition and connectivity
to market centers
Outcome Indicators
Indicator 1: # roads in good and fair condition as a
share of total classified road network
Baseline [2013]: 15%
Target [end of FY18]: 43%
Indicator 2: share of rural population with all-season
access
Baseline [2013]: 15%
Target [end of FY18]: 47%
9. Enhanced local government tax generation and
administration.
Outcome Indicators
i) Indicator 1: Amount of district revenues from 3
taxes.

10. Enhanced effectiveness and expanded coverage
of social protection system
Outcome Indicators
Indicator 1: SP staff within MINALOC recruited as a
% of total SP staff needed to implement the National
social Protection Strategy (NSPS) as stipulated by law

Bank and Partner Program

Financing
Ongoing: Rural Roads Project
Planned/Proposed
IDA: Rural Roads Project (AF)

Planned/Proposed
Program for Results operation on Public Sector
Governance focusing on PFM,
Decentralization and Statistics (FY2014/15)
IFC IC:
Improving local government tax administration
to support RRA in collecting and redistribute
district taxes.

Financing
Ongoing: SSPS3
Planned/Proposed:
Social Protection DPO/P4R (including support
to expand the VUP)

Rwanda Natural Resource Authority, 2012

5

Country Development
Goals
enhance effectiveness and
promote graduation from
poverty.

Development Challenges

CPS Objectives and Outcome Indicators

Bank and Partner Program

programs. Weak but growing
management and
implementation capacity across
the main social protection
programs.

(of which women)
Baseline [2012]: 95% (30% women)
AAA/ESW
Target [end of FY18]: 97% (32% women)
Planned/Proposed
Indicator 2: VUP Direct Support (DS) coverage: (a)
1.Developing a Child Sensitive SP System
Number of Sectors; (b) Number beneficiary
households (of which, female headed households).
(a) Baseline [2012]: 120 Sectors
Target[ end of FY18]: 300 Sectors
(b) Baseline [2012]: 19,583 households (60%
female headed)
Target[ end of FY18]:>30,000 households (63%
female headed)
Indicator 3: VUP Public Works coverage: (a) Number
of Sectors. (b) Number of beneficiary households (of
which female headed households)
(a) Baseline [2012]: 120 Sectors
Target[ end of FY18]: 210 Sectors
(b) Baseline [2012]: 66856 households
Target [end of FY18]: 85,000 households
Theme 3: Supporting accountable governance through public-financial management and decentralization
Enhance accountable
The EDPRS 2 rightly identifies, 11.Improved delivery of decentralized services
Financing
governance by promoting
pre-requisite, challenges and
Outcome Indicators
Ongoing: Quality of Decentralized Service
citizen participation and
strategic direction to achieve
Indicator 1: Citizens satisfied with (timeliness and
Delivery Support DPO
mobilization for delivery of the EDPRS 2 goals on
quality of) service delivery at the local level
Planned/Proposed:
development, strengthening Accountable Governance. In
Baseline [2012]: 70.4%
IDA:
public accountability and
Rwanda, as a result of
Target [end of FY18]: 85%
1.Program for Results operation on Public
improving service delivery
decentralization commenced in Milestones
Sector Governance focusing on PFM,
2000, subnational governments i. Increase in % of staff positions filled in revised
Decentralization and Statistics
are in charge for provision of
organizational structures (DPO outcome indicator);
public services. Nevertheless,
ii. Improvement in PEFA PI-23 on availability of
AAA/ESW
both quality and quantity of
information on resource received by service delivery 1.Programmatic AAA on Making
service delivery need to
unit (DPO outcome indicator)
Decentralization Work for Improved Service
improve further through
iii. Increase number of Districts and Sub-District
Delivery
strengthening effectiveness and
entities with service delivery charters (Governance
efficiency of decentralization
and Decentralization JSR)
(including policy framework
12.Strengthened accountability
such as clarification of roles
Outcome Indicators
and responsibilities, capacity
Indicator 1: Citizens satisfied with decentralization and

6

Country Development
Goals

Development Challenges

CPS Objectives and Outcome Indicators

development of local
governments, improvement of
government accountability and
transparency, and enhancement
of fiduciary accountability of
local governments).
Furthermore, limited citizen
participation and ownership of
development process have
resulted in weak public
accountability (including one
for service delivery).

participation (EDPRS 2 Goal)
Baseline [2012]: 77%
Target [end of FY18]: 90%
Indicator 2: Citizens satisfied with access of public
information (EDPRS 2 Goal)
Baseline [2012]: 57%
Target [end of FY18]: 80%
Milestones
i. % of citizens who participate in the district budgetary
process (DPO outcome indicator);
ii. Publication within three months of year-end
consolidated fiscal reports for the general
government (PFM SSP)
iii. Increase proportion of the value of procurement
tendered competitively (PFM JSR)
iv. Increase proportion of MDAs receiving unqualified
audit opinion (PFM JSR)

Bank and Partner Program

*Targets: [to be achieved by the end of FY18]

7

Annex 2: CAS Completion Report
Country: Rwanda
Date of CAS: August 7, 2008
Date of CAS Progress Report: February 9, 2011
Period Covered by CAS Completion Report: FY09-13
CAS Completion Report Prepared by: Peter Isabirye, with inputs from Rwanda Country Team

______________________________________________________________________________
I. Introduction
A. Context
1.
This report presents an assessment of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) 2 for the
Republic of Rwanda for the period FY09-12. However, since the Government’s Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS, 2008-12)–on which the CAS was based–was
extended by one year to end June 2013 to enable preparation of the second EDPRS (2013-18); the CAS
had to be extended, as well. Whereas no specific reference to extension was made; the 2011 CAS
Progress Report (CASPR) determined that the overall objectives, as set out in the CAS, remained valid
and relevant. Therefore, this CAS Completion Report (CASCR) and the “CAS period” cover FY09-13.
2.
The CAS Completion Report evaluates program performance and highlights key lessons
learnt. The CASCR evaluates performance of the CAS program implementation by (i) program
performance in influencing CAS outcomes as laid out in the results matrix, and (ii) Bank’s performance
in designing and managing the implementation of the program. It deals with issues relating to the
relevance, results, and impact of the Bank’s activities and draws lessons for developing the forthcoming
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS).
3.
The report is based on various reference documents3, discussions with the Country Team,
and evaluations by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). Overall, CAS performance was
satisfactory and Bank performance, superior. Key lessons learned include the need for strong country
ownership, a highly selective program, and use of more flexible financing instruments. After the
introduction, section II covers CAS program performance, section III evaluates the Bank’s performance,
while section IV, highlights key lessons learned and suggestions for the new CPS.
B. Summary of performance
4.
CAS outcomes are rated as satisfactory. Across a broad range of engagement areas, the CAS
program achieved results in line with expectations. The Bank’s program of ongoing portfolio of projects,
new lending, program of Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA), policy advice, Technical Assistance
(TA) Trust Funds, IFC investments and advisory services, and MIGA guarantees achieved the stated CAS
objectives and assisted the government to meet its goals. The CAS made significant progress towards all
expected outcomes, achieving eighteen (18) out of twenty two (22) stated outcome indicators. Only one
outcome indicator was not achieved while the rest were either mostly achieved or partially achieved.
Nonetheless, a few areas such as capacity building within Government and the private sector and slow
implementation of regional projects remained a challenge. The capacity building filter and Minimum

2

The CAS was jointly prepared by the World Bank Group – WBG (IDA, IFC, and MIGA).
Project Appraisal Documents, Implementation Support Reports, Aide Memoires, Back-to-Office Reports, Economic and Sector
Work, Implementation Completion and Results Reports, etc.
3

8

Integrated Trade Expansion Program (MITEP) TA program were not achieved, while support for
economic and financial analysis of public investments has not been significant. These limitations,
notwithstanding, the CAS achieved almost all set objectives.
5.
The World Bank Group performance in designing and managing implementation of the
CAS program is rated as superior. The program was designed under the core principles of alignment
with the country’s development goals, high selectivity, good identification of critical risks and mitigation
measures, increased coordination within the WBG and with other development partners, strong results
framework, and appropriate interventions. The Bank closely supervised the program—with 57% of Task
Team Leaders based in the Country Office—ensuring quality of new and ongoing operations,
disseminating knowledge services, and adequately responding to the country’s changing needs and
priorities.
6.
The WBG program was well aligned with the country’s priorities stated in its EDPRS and
remained almost as planned at CASPR. Implementation was sensitive to the country context, while at
the same time accommodative of changing circumstances such as the food and global financial crises. In
this respect, Rwanda accessed funding under the Global Food Price Response Program and the Crisis
Response Window. The Bank responded promptly and effectively to unexpected events such as the aid
shock in FY13. The use of programmatic Development Policy Lending (DPL) operations, as the main
lending instrument, enabled enough flexibility to the country in the way it allocated its resources to
priority sectors in order to meet set development targets. In addition, it helped to foster better donor
coordination, improved harmonization, and reinforced support for the country’s reform program among
the different budget support donors. The International Finance Corporation (IFC)’s engagement
maintained a strategic focus on the quality of the business environment and finance, while the Multilateral
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) provided political risk insurance guarantees to private foreign investors in the
energy sector, financial sector, and agribusiness.
7.
Delivery improved with a shorter lag between Board approval and effectiveness, mainly
through Additional Financing (AF) and DPL operations, but slow implementation still remains an
issue (as reflected in the Skills Development Project, Governance for Competitiveness TA Project,
Transport Sector Development Project and most of the regional projects). The Bank continues to be one
of Rwanda’s key development partners (DPs) delivering results across a broad range of engagement areas
in collaboration with other donors.
C. Progress made towards achievement of Rwanda’s development objectives
8.
Rwanda’s long term development objectives are articulated in its Vision 2020. The objective
of Rwanda Vision 2020 is to become a lower middle income economy (US$900 per capita)4 operating as
a knowledge-based services hub by 2020. The medium term strategy (EDPRS) assigned the highest
priority to accelerating growth to create employment and generate exports. It was framed around three
strategic flagship programs 5 : (i) growth; (ii) Vision 2020 Umurenge Programme (VUP), and (iii)
governance. The flagship on growth targeted economy-wide improvements in productivity. Its goal is to
transform Rwanda’s economy from subsistence agriculture towards an increase in commercial
agriculture, as well as manufacturing and services. VUP focuses on ensuring growth is shared by creating
economic opportunities for the poorest Rwandans. It has three components: (i) public works, (ii) credit
packages, and (iii) direct supports. The governance flagship seeks to strengthen political and economic
governance, and build institutions and capacity of the state. It envisages a wide range of reforms to

4
5

Revised to US$1,240 under EDPRS 2 (2013-2018), 2013.
EDPRS, 2007 and Rwanda CAS, 2009.

9

strengthen public sector institutions and capacity, and also includes aspects needed to create an attractive
business environment such as strengthening commercial justice systems, regulatory and administrative
frameworks, and promoting principles of good corporate governance.
9.
Rwanda, over the last decade, has delivered a “triple crown”—posting robust growth,
substantially cutting poverty, and reducing inequality. During CAS preparation, it was noted that
Rwanda had fully exhausted the growth effects of its post conflict reconstruction and growth had slowed.
It needed a much higher development path in order to put its long term development aspirations within
reach, projecting required annual average gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of 8 percent against
an estimate of 6 percent in 2007. Five years later, Rwanda registered impressive progress. Average real
growth was slightly over 8 percent; household consumption per adult-equivalent grew at 2.5 percent per
annum and was stronger for the poor than for the non-poor; the poverty headcount was cut by 12
percentage-points over the last five years to reach 45 percent in 2011; and inequality dropped, with the
Gini measure down from 0.52 to 0.49. Social indicators have improved—child mortality dropped by twothirds, primary school completion rates tripled to 79 percent, and enrollment in primary school is just shy
of universal.
10.
More than a million people have been lifted out of poverty. Rwanda experienced one of the
most exciting and fastest periods of growth and socio-economic progress over the last ten years; it was
one of the ten fastest growing economies in the world during the 2000 decade 6. More than a million
people were lifted out of poverty, population growth is stabilizing, and the country is making significant
progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and middle income status. The
triple crown of sustained economic growth (8 percent average), poverty reduction (12 percent), and a
reduction in income inequality (0.03) was achieved over the first EDPRS period.
11.
Remarkable socio-economic progress was achieved during the first EDPRS period.
Economic activity was driven by a large increase in agricultural output, increase in prices of Rwanda’s
main exports, and strong domestic demand financed through development assistance. Rwanda remained
relatively insulated from the slowdown in the advanced economies. Though inflation rose sharply in
2011, it has still remained in single digit and has been the lowest among East Africa Community (EAC)
countries. In 2012, high growth was sustained and inflation remained relatively modest, although risks
from instability in commodity prices and aid flows remain.
12.
An outstanding performance in improvements to the investment climate as measured by
Doing Business (DB). Combined with sound policies for macroeconomic stability, Rwanda made
impressive improvements to its investment climate, especially from 2005 to present. The World Bank
Doing Business publication recognized Rwanda as one of the top ten reforming countries in the world in
its 2006 and 2011 reports and as the global top reformer in 2010—ahead of countries like the United Arab
Emirates and Columbia. In that year, Rwanda’s overall ease of Doing Business ranking jumped an
unprecedented seventy-two places, from 139 to 67. The improvements continued, and in the latest report,
Doing Business 2014, Rwanda ranked 32nd globally from 52nd in DB 2013. Rwanda’s investment climate,
as measured by the Doing Business report compares overwhelmingly better than its EAC neighbors:
Tanzania (145th), Burundi (140th), Uganda (132nd), and Kenya (129th).
13.
In spite of the impressive achievements made during the first EDPRS period, significant
development challenges still remain. Though significantly reduced, head count and extreme poverty
remain high and persistent, particularly in rural areas. According to the third Integrated Household Living
Condition Survey (EICV III), 2012, poverty in rural areas still stands at 48.7 percent compared to 22.1

6

World Development Indicators, 2012

10

percent in urban areas. Moreover, there are significant variations in poverty reduction across the country
with the poorest district having 73 percent of its population living below the poverty line 7. Women are
more affected by poverty than men, and inequality continues to be comparatively high.
14.
Given the extent of reforms, investment has responded insufficiently. Domestic entry has
surged, while foreign investment has been stunted. Small local businesses reacted very positively to
business environment, in terms of entry into the market. Foreign and domestic private investments in
Rwanda have not met expectations that come with improvements in the business environment. Indeed,
comparing private sector’s gross fixed capital formation (GFCF-private) between Rwanda and its peers
shows that investment in Rwanda has been moderate. GFCF-private has increased by 3.8 percent points
as a share of GDP between 2004 and 2011, and on average by 0.5 percentage points annually8.
15.
Private sector growth and competitiveness is constrained by low skills and labour
productivity across all sectors of the economy, and structural transformation constrained by key
infrastructure gaps. Lack of skills is a particular issue to large firms with more than 100 employees (45
percent of which reported inadequate educated workforce as a constraint in 2011). The 2009 National
Skills Audit reported an average 61.5 percent skills deficit and severe skills gap in the private sector in
Rwanda. The most significant infrastructure constraint to firms of all sizes is electricity which is costly,
even by EAC regional comparison (at $0.24/kWh compared to $0.17/kWh in Uganda, $0.15/kWh in
Kenya, and $0.05kWh in Tanzania). Whereas generation has doubled from installed capacity of 55MW in
2007 to 110MW currently, it is still much less than the anticipated minimum demand of 563MW in the
medium term. In addition, Rwanda’s internal trade and competitiveness of exports are constrained by high
transport costs and an insufficient logistics system that has not grown in parallel with the increasing
demand to trade. For example, according to the report on Doing Business in the East Africa Community
2012, an exporter from Rwanda pays US$3,275 to transport a container of cargo to the port. This
compares to US$2,965 in Burundi, US$2,880 in Uganda, US$2,055 in Kenya, and US$1,255 in Tanzania.
Importers pay US$4,990 to transport a container from the port compared to US$4,855, US$3,015,
US$2,190, and US$1,430 in Burundi, Uganda, Kenya, and Tanzania, respectively. Among others,
Rwanda still faces challenges of high aid dependence and the risk of high unemployment, especially
among the youth.
II. CAS Program Performance
A. Overview
16.
This section covers CAS program performance. The evaluation, summarized in Annex 1, is
based on the outcomes and indicators as updated in CASPR, 2011, and highlights the effectiveness of the
CAS in achieving its stated objectives. It states key achievements under each CAS outcome, crosscutting issues, and ends with an overall assessment.
17.
The CAS sought, primarily, to contribute to the first objective of significantly raising
growth and creating jobs. A secondary objective was to consolidate specific elements of Rwanda’s
social progress by tackling selected aspects of social vulnerability. It focused on two strategic themes: (i)
promoting Rwanda’s economic transformation for sustainable growth and (ii) decreasing social
vulnerability. It was results-based and included twenty three (23) monitoring indicators and forty one (41)
milestones. Updates made at CASPR left twenty two (22) outcome indicators and thirty nine (39)

7
8

EICV III, NISR, MINECOFIN.
Rwanda Private Sector Development Policy Note, Upcoming.

11

milestones9. Progress made in terms of achieving the CAS outcomes are described (in part B) below,
following a brief assessment of the role played by DPL operations, non-lending TA, and aid effectiveness.
18.
The DPL operations played a key role in terms of the focus areas and the policy actions they
supported. The need to substantially raise the GDP growth rate and reduce social vulnerability were key
objectives of the DPLs, each of which had linkages to at least one CAS outcome. The Poverty Reduction
Support Financing (PRSF 4-8) supported the EDPRS flagship programs on growth and governance, while
a companion series of three DPLs—the Community Living Standards Grants/Credits (CLSG/Cs)—
supported the VUP with a focus on social protection and the health sector and improving service delivery
to the poorest and most vulnerable. Specific programs supported under the growth flagship program were:
(i) enhancing the skills of the population including through a shift away from Technical and Vocational
Education Training (TVET) to Post-Basic Education (PBE); (ii) increasing access to infrastructure
services, specifically energy, water, and transport through (a) improving cost-effective and operational
efficiency in the energy sector; (b) developing a framework for integrated and sustainable management
of water resources; (iii) increasing rural road access by improving the condition of the classified district
road network; (iv) raising agricultural productivity and production; and (v) broadening and deepening the
financial sector. Under Governance: (i) strengthening the public financial system and its management at
the central and local levels; (ii) improving the capacity and transparency of procurement methods; (iii)
pursuing implementation of budget and fiscal decentralization reforms; (iv) deepening civil service
reforms and incentives to build skills and retention. The CLSG/C program supported the Government of
Rwanda’s social protection and health policy reforms designed to reduce extreme poverty, initially in 30
pilot Sectors10, and to expand access to high-impact health, nutrition, and population interventions at the
community level. The program also helped Rwanda integrate international good practice within its
poverty-reducing policies.
19.
The implementation completion and results reports (ICRs) for the second PRSF series
(PRSF 4-7) and the CLSG/C series rated achievement of their development objectives as
satisfactory. The PRSFs had highly satisfactory performance with respect to implementation and
outcomes, as well as the overall relevance of the operations. The CLSG/C program fully achieved its
development objectives. Significant results were achieved in reducing maternal and child mortality, and
reducing the total fertility rate through increased use of family planning, which should lead to further
progress in poverty reduction in future. According to the fourth Demographic and Health Survey, 2010,
maternal mortality reduced from 750 per 100,000 lives in 2005 to 476 in 2010; 98% of pregnant women
received prenatal care, up from 94% in 2005; the percentage of deliveries assisted by skilled providers
increased from 39% to 69%, and the percentage of deliveries in health facilities increased from 30% to
69% over the same period. The proportion of married women using a modern method of contraceptive
increased from 35% in 2007/08 to 45% in 2010/11, and total fertility rate for women aged 15-49 for the
three years preceding the survey dropped from 6.1 in 2005 to 4.6 in 2010. The social protection sector has
significantly evolved, with strong achievements in policy development. Community health reforms have
also been deepened and further developed.
20.
Through the various DPLs, harmonization and collaboration with other development
partners was also enhanced under the CAS, in particular through mechanisms such as (i) the Common
Performance Assessment Framework (CPAF) developed with the Government and other development
partners to harmonize budget support and the related dialogue; and (ii) the preparation of Sector-Wide
Approach (SWAps) particularly in the sectors where the Bank was a lead donor (energy and agriculture).

9

One indicator (i.e. on rural access) was dropped at CASPR–since the operation supporting it would be slipped to beyond the
CAS period–and a new proposed new outcome was not developed. Two milestones were dropped. See Annex 1
10

A Sector is an administrative unit below a district.

12

21.
Provision of knowledge products and playing key leadership roles have been at the center of
the WBG operations. The Bank has provided non-lending TA (NLTA) and undertaken economic and
sector work (ESW) to underpin its operations. Regular macroeconomic monitoring through the Rwanda
Economic Update (REU) is closely linked to the flagship program on growth. The Bank’s leadership role
has been particularly significant in advancing policy dialogue between the Government of Rwanda and
other development partners such as through the Budget Support Harmonization Group (BSHG); Joint
Budget Support Reviews (JBSRs); co-chairing (together with government) sector working groups
(SWGs) of agriculture, energy, public finance management (PFM), and capacity building and
employment; and participating in other SWGs.
22.
The Bank has played a key role in shaping the aid effectiveness agenda over the years and is
a major champion of the Paris Declaration and Accra Agenda for Action. The Bank maintained a
country-driven development model enabling the mainstreaming of aid effectiveness principles at the
country level—by aligning CAS with the EDPRS, results-driven strategies, use of country systems (in
PFM), and mutual accountability. Enhancing quality and effectiveness of aid continues to be of
significant importance to Rwanda’s development agenda. The progress made in the area of the Single
Project Implementation Units (SPIUs), Project Treasury Single Account (TSA), as well as other
institutional capacity strengthening such as public financial reform has facilitated the increased use of
country systems by development partners. Rwanda is indeed recognized globally as one of the countries
that utilize and manage aid effectively. The confidence in Rwanda’s systems and commitments to reform
was evident in the increased volume of budget support to approximately US$390 million in FY12 from
US$278 million in FY11.
B. Progress by strategic engagement theme/pillar (towards CAS outcomes)
23.
The CAS was framed around five outcomes under the two strategic themes. The outcomes
were: (i) agriculture production–particularly for food crops–sustainably raised, (ii) improved access to
and quality of key infrastructure services, (iii) improved environment for sound private sector
development, (iv) capacity to manage public resources–at central and local levels–strengthened, and (v)
significant health and social risks–to vulnerable groups and to social cohesion in Rwanda–are mitigated
24.
Overall, progress towards achievement of CAS outcomes has been very strong. Eighteen (82
percent) of the specified CAS outcome indicators were achieved, two outcome indicators (9 percent) were
mostly achieved, one (4.5 percent) was partially achieved, and one (4.5 percent) was not achieved.
Progress on the milestones has also been strong with 77 percent achieved, 3 percent mostly achieved, 15
percent partially achieved, and 5 percent not achieved. When reviewed in terms of achievement of, or
progress towards the results specified in the CASPR matrix, performance was strongest in raising
agriculture productivity, access to electricity, and reducing social vulnerability (Table 1).

13

Annex Table 1: Achievement of CAS Outcomes and Milestones

1

5

1

34

78
3

11
-

5.5
-

5.5
-

3

79
4

3
-

15
1

3
-

5

5

-

-

-

5

10

1

1

-

12

5

1

-

-

6

9

-

3

1

13

1

1

1

1

4

4

-

-

-

4

4
100
4

-

-

-

4

3
60
3

-

1
20
1

1
20
1

5

18
82

2
9

1
4.5

1
4.5

22

30
77

1
3

6
15

2
5

39

Total

27

4

Not Achieved

18

Partially
Achieved

Achieved

1

Mostly
Achieved

Total

1

Partially
Achieved

2

Mostly
Achieved

14

Achieved
Strategic Theme 1: Promoting Rwanda’s
Economic Transformation for Sustained
Growth
%
1.1: Agriculture production–particularly for
food crops–sustainably raised
1.2: Improved access to and quality of key
infrastructure services
1.3: Improved environment for sound private
sector development
1.4: Capacity to manage public resources–at
central and local levels–strengthened
Strategic Theme 2: Decrease Social
Vulnerability
%
2.1: Significant health and social risks–to
vulnerable groups and to social cohesion in
Rwanda–are mitigated
Total
%

Milestones
Not Achieved

Outcomes

5

Promoting Rwanda’s Economic Transformation for Sustained Growth
CAS Outcome 1.1: Agricultural production–particularly for food crops–sustainably raised - Achieved
25.
Support focused on increasing agricultural productivity and commercialization. Given that
85 percent of Rwandan working adults work in agriculture, increasing agricultural productivity and
commercializing production would be critical to achieving Rwanda’s development goals. In this respect,
the World Bank embarked on the investment lending support first using a three phased Adaptable
Program Loan (APL), the Rural Sector Support Project (RSSP) that has focused on intensifying
production in the marshlands, since 2001. This was followed by the Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting
and Hillside Irrigation (LWH) Project that started in 2010 and focuses on increasing productivity on
hillsides and developing parts of these hillsides for irrigated horticulture production. The CAS placed
strong emphasis on use of sustainable approaches to increase agriculture productivity, and the RSSP—
then in the first year of its second phase—was a key instrument for delivery. RSSP 2’s sound project
design and effective implementation—involving marshland rehabilitation (an additional 3,324 ha of
irrigated marshland)11, hillside development (benefitting 10,000 ha), and the creation and strengthening of
81 cooperatives—created positive synergies between project components. RSSP 2 would continue to
expand irrigated area in cultivated marshlands and increase the use of sustainable land management
(SLM) practices. SLM would further be supported through the Integrated Management of Critical
Ecosystem Project (IMCEP), the regional Lake Victoria Environment Management Project (LVEMP) and

11

This also included construction of 8 dams, 164 km of primary canals, 160 km of secondary canals, 70 km of drainage canals,
and 44 km of access roads.

14

the multi-partner platform provided by TerrAfrica, which would be used to carry out analytical work to
support Government of Rwanda in developing a programmatic investment framework for SLM.
26.
Marshlands have been rehabilitated; hillsides developed; and yields of maize, rice, and
potato improved. Since the beginning of RSSP 1 in 2001, over 6,500 hectares of marshlands have been
rehabilitated or developed, and nearly 26,000 hectares of hillsides have been sustainably developed. Over
the CAS period, maize yields have improved from 1.6 tons/ha to nearly 5.0 tons/ha; while rice yields have
improved from 3.0 tons/ha to 6.30 tons/ha; and potato yields have improved from 7.0 tons/ha to nearly 20
tons/ha. In addition, a number of rural infrastructures have been built to link productive areas to markets.
Project implementation (RSSP 2), was and (RSSP 3) continues to be highly satisfactory, leading to key
achievements in marshland rehabilitation, hillside development, and strengthening of agricultural
cooperatives. Several enabling factors led to these accomplishments, even given the initial delays
resulting from exogenous factors. The RSSP 2 target was significantly exceeded (18,675 tons vs. 11,194
tons, by 167 percent). The main drivers of this significant increase in rice production were the project’s
marshland investments, which regulated and increased the water supply and permitted two cropping
seasons, and the project’s “software” support, including provision of appropriate intensification
technologies and improved inputs.
27.
A number of direct beneficiaries—also disaggregated by gender—have benefited from the
two projects. So far, of the 57,000 people who benefited from the first two RSSP series, 42 percent are
females as are 48 percent of the 19,828 people who have benefited from the LWH. The impact created by
these two programs is creating transformation in rural Rwanda. Results from the 2010-11 household
survey clearly indicate that the reported poverty reduction of 12% between 2005-06 and 2010-11 and the
corresponding more than one million pulled out of poverty are mainly attributed in part to improved
agriculture production, increased number of agro businesses, and increased farm wage employment.
28.
Implementation of the IMCEP led to improved ecosystem management interventions and
establishment of a coordination mechanism. The IMCEP promoted the adoption of ecosystem
management interventions through capacity strengthening, the formulation and implementation of
community-based integrated ecosystems management plans (watershed management plans and wetland
catchment management plans). At the time of project closure, in June 2011, an inter-ministerial
committee had been established as a mechanism for marshland coordination. In addition, four watershed
management plans had been prepared, against two originally targeted.
29.
Through its strong leadership in the sector, the Bank has played a key role in providing
technical assistance and policy advice. It helped refine the design of the LWH and was able to
leverage— and administers— resources from other donors to support the program: (i) Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program-GAFSP ($50 million), United States Agency for International DevelopmentUSAID ($12.5 million), and (iii) Canadian International Development Agency-CIDA ($8 million).
30.
Sustainable intensification technologies have been adopted. Whereas limited support for SLM
was received from TerrAfrica, farmers in RSSP2 and LWH targeted areas have adopted sustainable
marshland or hillside intensification technologies. According to the Impact Assessment survey (2012), 98
percent of the beneficiary farmers had adopted at least two improved sustainable technologies 12 by
October 2012. The LVEMP is having implementation capacity challenges and no significant
achievements have been made yet.
12

Adoption of sustainable intensification technologies is defined for the purpose of the RSSP as adoption of at least two of the
following practices: soil fertility management (including appropriate use of organic and/or inorganic fertilizer), integrated pest
management (IPM), conservation tillage, contour bunding, construction of erosion control structures including terraces,
vegetation strips, and agroforestry practices.

15

CAS Outcome 1.2: Improved access to and quality of key economic infrastructure services - Achieved
31.
Electricity generation has doubled. The World Bank’s supported Urgent Electricity
Rehabilitation Project (UERP) focused on helping improve Rwanda’s electricity generation capacities.
Accordingly, the 20 MW Heavy Fuel Power Plant in Jabana, became operational in May 2009. This plant,
together with other domestic and regional hydro plants, constitute the back-bone of the Rwandan
electricity supply and has enabled the government to eliminate load shedding and phase-out part of the
rental diesel generators with maintained supply quality. Energy generation has doubled from installed
capacity of 55MW in 2007 to 110MW currently.
32.
Electricity access has also doubled from 6 percent in 2009 to 13 percent in 2012. The UERP
was followed by support for an electricity rollout program—the Rwanda’s Electricity Access Rollout
Program (EARP) —whose objective is to increase the number of households connected to the electricity
grid to 350,000 by 2013 from the initial 110,000 in 2009. The EARP is implemented in a sector-wide
approach (SWAp) with the assistance of Energy Sector Management Assistance Program’s Africa
Renewable Energy Access (AFREA) Program, since 2009. The number of customers so far connected
had increased to about 332,000 households (13 percent national coverage) by December 2012, the third
year of the program implementation. The electrification program helped to bring benefits in rural areas
such as improved lighting thereby extending the number of working hours and reduced spoilage of fresh
products due to availability of refrigeration and cooling. Rural electrification also greatly contributed to
improved service delivery, especially in health, education, and administrative offices.
33.
Emphasis is now returning to increasing generation capacity. The Sustainable Energy
Development Project provides advisory and technical support, including micro hydropower feasibility
studies. The IFC has provided loans to the private developers, and MIGA has provided a guarantee to the
25MW Kivuwatt methane plant. The Energy SWAp is in place and the twining between Electrogaz
(Electricity, Water and Sanitation Authority –EWSA) and the Tunisian Utility STEG was successfully
concluded.
34.
Under transport, rehabilitation of the Kigali-Ruhengeri road was completed in September
2012 and provisional hand over to the Government of Rwanda was made. IDA provided an
additional $11 million to cover cost overruns. Completion of rehabilitation of this road is of significant
functional/commercial importance because it is part of the Northern Corridor (and integrates into the
transport infrastructure of the East African network) and is an integral part of the EDPRS with the
potential to generate sustained employment through periodic or routine road maintenance works. The
regional East Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project has experienced excessively long
implementation delays due to safeguard issues on the Rwandan side of the border at Gatuna and a risk of
cancellation is still inevitable if no significant progress is made. Access within Kigali, Huye and Musanze
was improved. The East Africa Road Network Project (FY10) was not delivered and there has been
limited Bank engagement on the regional rail project being spearheaded by Africa Development Bank
(AfDB). The Rural Roads Project was slipped to FY14 due, in part, to extended discussions with
Government of Rwanda over wider design standards (with inherent safeguard issues) it had enacted,
earlier in the project preparation process.
35.
The eRwanda Project supported several studies 13 which became the foundation and
accelerated preparation of the Regional Communications Infrastructure Project (RCIP). Approval
of RCIP, on September 30, 2008, promptly corresponded with the launch of international submarine
fiber-optic cables in East Africa (EASSy, TEAM, SEACOM) and terrestrial fiber-optic backbone
13

Assessment of East Africa Submarine Cable Project”, “Preliminary Study on National Connectivity Options”, and “Detailed
Study on National Connectivity Options”

16

networks (from the Rwandan national backbone to the submarine cable points in Mombasa and Dar es
Salaam). Under an enabling environment, several advisory contracts have been completed and others are
underway. Advisory work on interconnection and infrastructure-sharing has been completed and the
results have been implemented in regulatory decisions, which are expected to have significant positive
impacts in the sector. This work was implemented in response to direct requests from the Government
and has met the client's needs. RCIP support has also funded in-house advisory and technical support on
ICT, broadband, and e-Government. The primary output under connectivity was the pre-purchase of
capacity for the Government and thereby strengthening the overall broadband connectivity for Rwanda.
Significant progress has been made and some work has also been undertaken in connecting district offices
with local area networks (LANs). However, the roll-out of broadband services and supply of broadband
connectivity to institutions has been delayed by the Government since its broadband access network
strategy has not yet been finalized.
CAS Outcome 1.3: Improved environment for private sector development – Achieved
36.
Improved perception of the investment climate. With Bank support under the Competitiveness
and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP), a total of 13 commercial laws14 were reviewed, finalized
and enacted. The project enabled the creation of three fully functional commercial courts and an
Arbitration Centre to settle business disputes and reduce the time taken to enforce court decisions. The
time taken to settle a commercial dispute in the Commercial Court was decreased from 394 days in 2003
to 230 days in 2011. The high success rate in legislative reform could not be totally attributed to the
project as some of the reforms pertaining to Doing Business indicators were, as from 2008, also funded
by the IFC Rwanda Investment Climate Reform Project (RICRP). As a consequence, the time and cost to
set up a business significantly decreased and Rwanda was ranked 8th globally in the 2012 Doing Business
Report in the ‘Starting a Business’ indicator. The CEDP funded the Doing Business Reform Unit and
paved the way for the IFC RICRP in terms of legislative and investment promotion reforms.
37.
The performance of the banking and non-banking sectors was improved. Access to financial
services was enhanced through improved service delivery of private commercial banks, micro finance
institutions (MFIs), and new financial products such as leasing were introduced. CEDP’s initial financing
contributed to the improvement of the quality of services offered by the financial sector in Rwanda. The
main achievements include: (i) improvement of the portfolio management of Rwanda Commercial Bank
(BCR) after its privatization process; (ii) a better performing Popular Bank of Rwanda (UBPR) after its
restructuring and recapitalization; (iii) introduction of a new chart of accounts for the banking sector; (iv)
a Credit Reference bureau; (v) the successful implementation of the Automated Clearing House (ACH)
and Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS); and (iv) regular on site and off site supervision of
commercial banks and MFIs, including saving and credit cooperatives (SACCOs). All banks now comply
with the minimum capital requirement of US$ 8.6 million and required minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio
of 15 percent. There is now a more efficient banking system in Rwanda and the performance of the nonbanking sector also improved.
38.
The CEDP significantly contributed to improve the perception of Rwanda as an investment
destination. Through the reforms in the business environment, financial sector, and public utilities, the
CEDP helped improve investor perceptions on Rwanda. It also supported investment promotion
campaigns to attract foreign investors in Rwanda. The share of private investment to GDP increased from
14

The legislations are: (1) Law establishing commercial courts, (2) Law on Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation in
Commercial Matters, (3) Law Establishing the Business Registration Services Agency, (4) Labor code, (5) Law on mortgages,
(6) Law on securities in movable property, (7) Insolvency law, (8) Companies acts, (9) Competition and Consumer Protection
Law, (10) Draft bill on Provisions applicable on Privately Financed infrastructures, (11) Contract Law, (12) Condominium Law;
(13) Law on electronic transactions. The 14th which is Negotiable Instruments Law has not yet been enacted

17

7 percent in July 2008 to 10.2 percent by end 2012.15 Export of goods and services continued to grow
over the CAS period, except for 2009 (due in part to the financial crisis) and were 14.3 percent of GDP by
end 2012. Note, however, that the Minimum Integrated Trade Expansion Program (MITEP) was
cancelled at Government’s request.
39.
The project financed the establishment and strengthening of the capacity of several
institutions in Rwanda. Support was given to the judiciary, regulatory bodies, institutions providing
support to enterprises and SMEs, banks including the Central Bank, specialized training schools,
investment promotion and facilitation agencies, and the Private Sector Federation. The knowledge and
experience gained by the beneficiaries through CEDP should contribute to sustain the reforms and even
deepen the reforms in the business environment and financial services sector.
40.
To ensure the sustainability of investment climate reforms, the Government continues to
finance the Doing Business unit which was created under Rwanda Development Board (RDB) to
oversee Rwanda’s performance with regard to the IFC-World Bank Doing Business indicators. The
Bank’s current operation—Governance for Competitiveness TA Project—contributes to sustaining the
achievements of the previous project through continued support to selected government agencies in the
areas of export diversification and competitiveness for the horticulture and tourism sectors. The special
economic zone (SEZ) is an additional activity supported by the WBG which is geared to promote the
industrial sector as well as ease access to land and utility services.
41.
IFC, MIGA, and World Bank activities strategically complemented each other particularly
in the private sector development and energy sectors. IFC has been involved in improving the
country’s private investments through advisory services and investments, with its strategy focused on
improving the investment climate; building the capacity of SMEs and micro enterprises; and supporting
development of projects in the financial, tourism, food processing, and infrastructure sectors. IFC made
investments in a number of areas including: energy; construction and real estate; food and beverages;
accommodation and tourism services; and finance and insurance. IFC also provided a local currency
SWAP facility to the National Bank of Rwanda to provide up to $50 million local currency equivalent for
long term financing (up to 7 years) of projects in Rwandan Francs.
42.
IFC’s Rwanda Investment Climate Reform Program supported reforms to improve the
regulatory environment, build institutions, and attract private sector participation in key sectors.
The main achievement is the improvement of Rwanda’s Doing Business ranking; moving from being
among the top five reformers in sub-Saharan Africa in Doing Business 2009 to the world top reformer in
2010 and second top reformer in 2011. Rwanda has since continued to perform exceptionally well. The
Rwanda Entrepreneurship Development Program supported SME competitiveness through building
capacity, creating linkages with larger firms, and promoting stronger entrepreneurship among the youth
and women. It facilitated the establishment of a privately owned SME Solutions Center, which provided
incubation facilities for up to 32 businesses in partnership with Raizcorp, a South Africa-based successful
incubation model. IFC also provided Infrastructure Advisory Services for the development of a public
private partnership (PPP) to support a 25,000 m3/day plant for bulk water supply to Kigali City.
43.
MIGA provided guarantees for improvements in Rwanda’s financial sector including
helping to: (i) improve retail banking services and functionality in areas such as accepting international
VISA cards; (ii) satisfy capital adequacy requirements laid down by the National Bank of Rwanda; (iii)
increase the number of ATMs in use in Rwanda; (iv) define a card strategy that incorporates the use of
national ID cards as credit/debit cards; and (v) strengthen lending to SMEs and facilitate equity

15

IMF Estimates

18

investments in greenfield projects that are seen as central to Rwanda’s growth. It also provided a
guarantee to a methane gas to power project.
CAS Outcome 1.4: Management of public resources at central and local levels strengthened- Mostly
Achieved.
44.
Improved public financial management. The Bank’s supported Public Sector Capacity
Building Project (PSCBP) financed a range of technical assistance, consultancies, and equipment to
support the Government’s public finance management (PFM) and procurement reforms. The PFM
Reform Coordinator and staff of the PFM secretariat were financed through the PSCBP. The
development of the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) blueprint and the
rollout of IFMIS, supporting software and hardware, and IFMIS training were also supported by the
project. Training was provided for government accountants in all budget agencies on how to produce
financial reports, and consolidated statements. This led to an increase in the number of agencies that
complete annual financial reports from a low of 16% of government ministries, departments and agencies
(MDAs) in 2008 to 75% of MDAs submitting timely reports by end of 2011. Procurement coaches were
recruited to train staff in strategic Ministries such as MINIFRA, MINEDUC and MINISANTE to improve
the management of high value contracts.
45.
Improved accountability and efficiency of human resources. Wages and salaries constitute a
significant portion of the Government budget, and are estimated at 12.7 percent of Government
expenditure. In this regard, the rollout of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll system (IPPS) financed by
the PSCBP is an integral element in improving accountability and transparency. The IPPS has helped to
minimize the risk of ghost workers. PSCBP support for upgrading the IPPIS on pay, leave, promotion,
and termination has allowed the Government to ensure that wages and salaries are captured accurately,
potential manual entry errors or data manipulations are eliminated, and matches with data captured in the
IFMIS systems managed by the PFM Secretariat in MINECOFIN. The project also formalized the IPPIS
user group and trained 282 members from public institutions on how to use the IPPIS. The training
included Human Resource Directors, Directors of planning and IT officers. At the close of the project in
December 2011, 55 out of 94 (58.5%) public institutions were integrated into the IPPIS. A quality
assurance review of the IPPIS was also done and validated.
46.
The roll out of the citizen charters and service directories supported by the project is aimed
at improving accountability and responsiveness of Government to citizens. The work on the citizen
charters began under the original PSCBP and was carried over into the restructured project. A total of
sixty (60) Citizen Charters have been rolled out in English and Kinyarwanda and posted on MDA
websites, exceeding the target of fifty five (55).
47.
The project provided support for the development of the Rwanda Public Sector Pay and
Retention Policy and Implementation Strategy, as well as the situational and cost benefit analysis
that inform the policy. The strategy was adopted by Cabinet in January 2012. The policy aims to address
the structural issues of public service pay policy priorities and the critical issue of staff turnover in the
public service, which have been continuously identified as an obstacle to achieving the Government’s
development objectives. Implementation of the pay policy covers the period 2011/12 – 2017/18. Of
critical importance is that the policy allowed the Government to improve the wages of public teachers,
which have been an obstacle to the attainment of education outcomes as poorly paid teachers are less
motivated.
48.
The Public Sector Management Strategy 2012-17 has been developed and approved by
Cabinet. The Bank supported updating of the Strategy as well as the development of the Human
Resource Management and Development Policy. The policy was reviewed in November 2011 during a

19

leadership workshop with representatives of the ministry of public service and labour (MIFOTRA). An
administrative procedures manual for public servants was developed under the project and made available
in two versions; French and English.
49.
Support for capacity building in economic and financial analysis has been constrained by
slow project implementation. Moreover, the continued existence of serious capacity constraints across
sectors/projects (and amidst a number of efforts to address them) has highlighted the difficulties of
capturing, measuring, and aggregating data about successful capacity building efforts. However, the
establishment of a Public Sector Capacity Building Secretariat by Government and supported by the
PSCBP has assisted in coordinating and mainstreaming capacity building into government and donor
programmes.
Decrease Social Vulnerability
CAS Outcome 1.5: Significant health and social risks–to vulnerable groups and to social cohesion in
Rwanda–are mitigated - Achieved
50.
Strengthened national social protection system to cushion vulnerable families from shocks.
Through the Support to Social Protection System (SSPS) series of operations and drawing on lesson from
its predecessor, the Community Living Standards series, the World Bank has helped to expand the Vision
2020 Umurenge Program (VUP)—the Government’s main safety net program—to cover 43 percent of the
country’s 416 geographical sectors in 2012, up from just 7 percent when it was launched in 2008. The
number of poor people benefiting from the program has grown from less than 10,000 to over half a
million in the same period. In addition, the SSPS operations have been critical to helping Government
enhance the effectiveness and increase coverage of its overall social protection systems by supporting
establishment and improvement of key areas like the impact evaluation, targeting effectiveness, the
management information system, and the harmonization and coordination of the main programs.
51.
The SSPS program expansion is also gender sensitive consistent with the Government
policy on family and gender promotion. Under the VUP, 68 percent of households which benefit from
cash transfers are women headed households, while 46 percent of participants in public works are women.
52.
A number of ex-combatants and armed group members were demobilized and reintegrated.
Through the Demobilization and Reintegration Program, all 26,585 ex-combatants under the Rwandan
Defense Forces and 10,640 Armed Group members had been demobilized and reintegrated by November
2012 and a total of 7,282 reintegration grants were provided between 2009 and 2012.
C. Cross-cutting
53.
Crosscutting issues of gender, HIV/AIDS, environment, etc. did not feature prominently in
the CAS. It was assumed that they would be mainstreamed into individual (project) operations. More
broadly, teams prepared strategies for integrating these issues into their operations for instance in
agriculture (RSSP/LWH) a gender action plan was developed, while a gender strategy and a HIV/AIDS
strategy were developed under the Transport Sector Development Project to guide inclusion of these
issues into investments in the transport sector in the country.
D. Overall CAS Assessment.
54.
Overall, program performance is rated as satisfactory. The program achieved almost all the
stated CAS objectives and assisted the government to achieve its goals. It had exceptional development
impacts in increasing agriculture output, access to electricity, and support for social protection programs.
There were no major shortcomings and no violations of safeguard issues were identified in the program.

20

III. Evaluating Bank Performance
55.
This section evaluates Bank performance. It looks at (i) CAS design and (ii) CAS
implementation. Among other things, it covers relevance of CAS objectives and their alignment with
country development objectives; design of WBG interventions for achieving CAS objectives (including
selection of areas of engagement and instruments, adequacy and appropriateness of interventions,
consistency between financing and AAA, synergy across WBG, and consideration of other development
partners’ programs); strength of the results framework; and identification of critical risks and their
mitigation measures. It also looks at quality of supervision (including managing program risk and quality
of the portfolio); quality of preparation of new projects and AAA; relevance, quality and dissemination of
AAA; responsiveness to changing country circumstances, priorities and demands; WBG efforts for
improving coordination with other development partners; and attention to safeguard and fiduciary issues.
A. CAS Design
56.
The CAS was aligned with the EDPRS, was highly selective, and focused on increased donor
harmonization. The CAS supported implementation of the EDPRS and its results framework was
directly aligned with EDPRS development outcomes. The support program was prepared in a highly
consultative manner involving government, other development partners, private sector, and civil society
organizations. It focused Bank engagement on EDPRS areas, primarily growth and selected social areas.
It supported progress on MDGs 1 on poverty and hunger; as well as MDG 4 on child mortality; and MDG
5 on maternal mortality. Under the second theme, support was targeted to public works and direct
assistance and health program focused on community health focusing on child and maternal mortality
risks, and demobilization and reintegration. The selectivity was based on the Government of Rwanda’s
preference for the Bank’s engagement. It significantly reduced areas where the WBG provides support,
with no new IDA financing in a number of sectors 16 where other donors were already engaged or
expected to contribute financing, for better harmonization of donor support. Selectivity was further
confirmed when, in July 2010, the Government finalized a division of labor (DoL) exercise, which aimed
to limit each development partner’s investment operations to three sectors. The DoL confirmed the
Bank’s priority engagement in three sectors—agriculture, energy, and transport (including ICT)—as well
as some cross-sector areas.
57.
Jointly prepared by the WBG and more targeted within the areas of intervention. The
design sought to draw on synergies within the WBG and catalyze higher volumes of private sector
resources to support Rwanda’s development. IFC was to continue its focus on supporting Government of
Rwanda to improve the investment climate; build the capacity of micro, small and medium enterprises;
and support development of projects with high impact in the financial, tourism, agribusiness, and
infrastructure sectors. MIGA’s increasing role was expected to grow with guarantees in the micro finance,
financial, and energy sectors.
58.
The design involved increasing the use of development policy lending (DPL), which was in
line with the Rwanda’s aid policy and the country’s good performance. The annual PRSG (budget
support) would remain the main DPL instrument. Through the DPL instrument, the Bank would support
efforts to strengthen capacity to design reforms and programs, to implement them effectively, to monitor
their impact and feed results into further policy and program refinement. Capacity building was planned
to be interwoven through the entire CAS program through the application of the “Capacity Building
Filter”. The filter would include measures to help build public sector capacity and strengthen the
participation of civil society in development. It would be used to streamline capacity building efforts into
all Bank operations and analytic work.

16

Primary education, water and sanitation, HIV/AIDS, urban development and public service reform.

21

59.
Investment Project Financing was envisaged to be used much less, mainly for delivering
large infrastructure including regional programs and areas where IDA financing would help
leverage additional resources. Analytic and advisory activities (AAA) and technical assistance (TA)
services would be used more strategically to complement financial operations. More specifically, they
would be used to respond more to the demand and provide real time advice and support to Government.
Trust Fund resources would be used to strengthen partnerships and complement IDA resources. The
design also incorporated new ways of doing business which would enhance WBG effectiveness such as
the use of country system.
B. CAS implementation
60.
Overall CAS implementation was satisfactory. The CAS was implemented nearly as designed.
DPLs were the main lending instrument comprising at least 50 percent of annual commitments and 70
percent in annual disbursements. Investment Project Financing was used more flexibly either for
Adoptable Program Lending (as was the case in Agriculture –RSSP) or for Additional Financing (as was
the case in transport and energy). The Bank’s interventions remained in its core areas of engagement, with
close collaboration with IFC and MIGA in the private sector, agribusiness/horticulture, and energy.
61.
The DPL operations provided substantial financing to Rwanda’s budget, including during
the 2008 crisis. The DPLs—totaling $618.2m17 —were a cornerstone of the World Bank’s support to
implement the EDPRS. Since Rwanda depends on highly concessional financing, not just to cover an
ambitious investment program, but also to cover parts of the recurrent budget expenditures, budget
support grants provide a preferred contribution to Rwanda’s overall financing needs. The Government of
Rwanda looks to the World Bank and other development partners as a source of continued financing in
meeting these needs. The Bank was also successful in using the PRSFs to leverage additional
concessional funding for Rwanda, including US$10 provided through the Global Food Crisis Response
Program, US$29.8 million from the Crisis Response Window, and US$24 million from the IDA-15 buffer
fund. This also points to the responsiveness of the WBG to changing circumstances, priorities, and
demands of Rwanda. The CLSG/C series leveraged $12 million grant from the Health Results Innovation
Trust Fund (HRITF) supported by the Governments of Norway and the Great Britain and managed by the
World Bank.
62.
The Bank’s strong engagement through the PRSF series was successful in fostering better
donor coordination, improved harmonization, and reinforced support for reforms among the
country’s budget support donors: the World Bank, African Development Bank, and bilateral donors —
all partners in the Budget Support Harmonization Group and part of the semi-annual joint budget support
reviews (JBSR). Over the course of the series, the Bank was instrumental in supporting the establishment
and implementation of the Common Performance Assessment Framework (CPAF) process. While the
CPAF contains a number of outcome indicators, which other donors use as their condition for budget
support disbursement, the policy actions formulated in the CPAF are by design more process-oriented.
For Government, the goal of these policy actions is to be able to monitor if key milestones are being
achieved, thus, helping the Government to track progress over the year towards fulfillment of key
outcome indicators. The process nature of many prior actions contravenes World Bank good practice, but
should also be seen in the context of strong country ownership of the reform process. Some of the policy
actions supported by the series are highlighted in section II, paragraph 16, above.
63.
The success of the PRSF series was also largely helped by its ability to base its design on
strong sector dialogue. This was facilitated through engaging the sector specialists early in the process
and ensuring participation in sector dialogue through the sector working groups (SWGs). This has helped
to: (i) ensure the PRSF reflects substantive policy agreements reached at the sector level; (ii) strengthen
17

See table 2 below.

22

the capacity of sector ministries to present their needs and priorities during national level policy
discussions and budget negotiations; and (iii) facilitate coordination of the Bank’s inputs into the CPAF
policy discussions in a timely manner. Representation of key sector staff in-country has been crucial in
contributing to this process.
64.
Three main trust funds (TFs) are linked to ongoing IDA operations (transport, LWH,
demobilization) and were leveraged to either meet a financing gap or scale up IDA operations.
Three stand-alone TFs were to meet specific needs of the Government: statistical capacity building,
economic empowerment of young girls and environmental sustainability, while another TF was used to
support continue capacity building efforts under the VUP program, following closure of the investment
operation, DCDP in 2009.
65.
The analytical pieces undertaken met the objectives of feeding into new IDA operations. The
Country Education Status report and Post-Secondary Education were used in the design of the Skills
Development project, and the just in time policy notes, mainly in the finance and private sector
development were used during investor conferences in energy and agribusiness/horticulture to showcase
the investment potential in those areas. Regular economic monitoring is done through the biannual
Rwanda Economic Update. More could probably have been done in the area of AAA and TA, but all
analytic work needed to originate from and be decided within the SWGs. The capacity building filter was
not realized, mainly due to design issues.
66.
Nearly the entire program was delivered, albeit with a few slippages and adjustments.
Slippages mainly occurred in the first fiscal year of the CAS, some due to challenges beyond the control
of the program (i.e. the non-applicability of the Indigenous policy and the need for confirmation from TF
contributing donors delayed preparation of the Energy Access and Demobilization/Reintegration projects,
respectively). Nonetheless, the slippages and adjustments did not significantly affect delivery of the
program. Two region operations – East Africa Road Network and East Africa Power Pool for FY10 and
11, respectively, were not delivered.
67.
Implementation of the ongoing program is satisfactory. Of the ten ongoing operations
(including TFs) only one (1) is rated moderately satisfactory (MS) on achievement of the development
objective (DO) and three (3) as moderately satisfactory (MS) on implementation progress (IP). The rest
are rated satisfactory (S) for both DO and IP. Disbursement ratio has been upward of 20 percent,
annually. Nineteen operations (9 DPLs and 10 IPFs) have closed during the CAS period and IEG has
reviewed implementation completion and results reports (ICRs) for ten of them. Annex Table 2 below
shows a satisfactory performance. The Bank pays close attention to monitoring and regularly reported on
the quality of the portfolio, quickly addressing issues as they arose. There was no violation of safeguard
policies and great efforts were taken to address fiduciary issues. Nonetheless, implementation capacity
challenges still remain mainly in fiduciary (financial management and procurement) and monitoring and
evaluation.
68.
Overall, Bank performance is rated as superior. The Country Survey18, conducted in 2012
confirmed just as much.

18

Rwanda Country Survey, 2012

23

Annex Table 2: Operations/ICRs completed over the CAS period FY09-FY13
Project ID

P106083
P113241
P117495
P122247
P145114
P106834
P117758
P122157
P126877
P131666
P115816
P071374
P075129
P045091
P060005
P090194
P098926
P074102
P057295
P066386
P105176

Name

Amt.
($ mil)

DPLs
Fifth Poverty Reduction Grant (PRSG V)
80.0
Sixth Poverty Reduction Grant (PRSG VI)
115.8
Seventh Poverty Reduction Grant (PRSG VII)
104.4
Eight Poverty reduction Facility (PRSF VIII)
125.0
Quality of Decentralized Service Delivery (DPO)
50.0
First Community Living Standards Grant (CLSG I)
6.0
Second Community Living Standards Grant (CLSG II)
6.0
Third Community Living Standards Credit (CLSC III)
6.0
First Support to Social Protection System (SSPS I)
40.0
Second Support to Social Protection System (SSPS II)
50.0
Education for All- First Truck Initiative (EFA-FTI)
35.0
Investment Lending
Multi-Sec HIV/AIDS Program (MAP)
43.4
Emergence Demobilization and Reintegration Project
30.5
Human Resources Development Project (HRDP)
35.0
Urban Infrastructure and City Management Project
20.0
Urgent Electricity Rehabilitation Project (UERP)
25.0
eRwanda
10.0
Decentralization and Community Development Project
20.0
Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project
46.6
Public Sector Capacity Building Project (PSCBP)
20.0
Second Rural Sector support Project (RSSP II)
35.0

Key dates
Approval
Closing

ICR Ratings
O
BP

IEG Review
O
BP

03/17/09
03/30/10
02/24/11
11/29/11
05/14/13
04/02/09
03/16/10
03/22/11
03/20/12
03/14/13
10/09/09

06/30/10
06/30/11
06/30/12
06/30/12
06/30/14
06/30/10
06/30/11
06/30/12
03/30/13
06/30/14
06/30/10

S

S

S

S

S

MS

S

MS

03/31/03
04/25/02
06/06/00
11/10/05
01/27/05
09/07/06
06/15/04
04/19/01
07/08/04
06/24/08

10/30/08
12/31/08
12/31/09
12/31/09
04/30/10
12/31/10
12/31/10
07/31/11
12/31/11
10/31/12

S
S
MU
HS
S
S
S
MS
MS
HS

S
S
MU
S
S
S
S
MS
MS
HS

MU
MU
MU
HS
S
MS
S
MS
MS

MS
MS
MU
S
S
MS
S
MS
MU

O – Outcome rating, BP – Bank performance

24

IV. Lessons Learnt and Suggestions for New CPS
69.
This section highlights key lessons learned during the CAS period and suggestions for the
new CPS. They include program selectivity, use of more flexible financing instruments, good results
framework, decentralized project supervision, delivering as one WBG, and the need to build capacity
within Government.
70.
Having a highly selective program helped to focus the design of the CAS in key strategic
areas where the WBG would add value. The CAS program targeted few areas, essential to Rwanda’s
continued growth and development aspirations. Government’s strong commitment to effective use of aid
through increased donor coordination and country ownership, further helped achieve selectivity. The
various aid coordination mechanisms helped maintain the dialogue and focused the reforms. The Bank’s
program continues to be strong and delivering development impacts across a broad range of areas. The
WBG’s partnership with the government and the development community is strong, and provides a
conducive environment to achieve development outcomes. The WBG should maintain a demand-driven
strategic focus within a framework of selectivity with priority to areas where it can contribute the most to
addressing Rwanda’s development challenges.
71.
Use of general budget support was effective in a number of ways but is vulnerable to donor
sentiments. A key lesson learned from the DPLs was that they proved to be effective in advancing
Government-owned reforms. The PRSF series provided important support to the Government to
operationalize the EDPRS by translating its objectives into priority actions, while the CLSC/SSPS series
supported the Government of Rwanda’s social protection system. As the DPLs progressed, so the reform
agenda evolved, but remained overall broad. This is attributable to the breadth of the Bank’s policy
dialogue with Government, but also reflects the recognition by policy-makers of the utility of the budget
support instrument in helping to move the reform process forward. That notwithstanding, the
unpredictable reaction by donors to delay or cut aid over real or perceived political risks has budgetary
implications and could have negative impacts on achievement of a country’s development objectives. The
uncertainty that surrounded budget support operations in FY13, showed Rwanda’s vulnerability to aid
shocks. It presented valuable lessons for quick reprogramming and designing of more flexible financing
mechanisms to respond to fast-changing country environment, as well as a rethink of future aid
architecture.
72.
Another key lesson learned from the successful implementation of the CAS is the
importance of capacity building. Given the capacity constraints of a small, but reform-oriented
Government, the principles of selectivity, ownership and predictability are emphasized in Rwanda. A
complex budget support framework requires capacity support for program design, elaboration of reforms,
identification, and measurement of outcome indicators. Strong capacity support has led to substantial
progress in reforms for example, in PFM, the health, education and agriculture sectors. Another example
pertained to the issue of lack of capacity on the side of Government in fiscal decentralization. That is why
part of the supported reform program of the PRSF series focused on capacity building, including to subnational levels of government in planning. This work is now being carried forward under the Quality of
Decentralized Service Delivery DPO. Regarding project implementation, however, capacity constraints
leading to slow implementation (including regional projects as most affected) still remain, highlighting
the need to rethink capacity building approaches, going forwards.
73.
A number of products were delivered as one WBG. In energy, financial sector, tourism, and
agribusiness, WBG teams worked jointly to deliver the Investor Conference on horticulture and tea in
2010, the Energy Forum in 2012, and different knowledge products across the private sector. Delivering
as one WBG has helped create synergy within the institution and yielded significant benefits for the
client. It demonstrated what could be achieved when delivering as one WBG.

25

74.
Much of project supervision was decentralized. In countries with limited institutional capacity,
having the TTL in the field can help to resolve issues as they raise with either the Implementing agencies
or Government and ensure a constant implementation pace. For a greater part of the CAS period, nearly
60 percent of TTLs were based in the country office. However, the trend has since changed, with many
operations now managed from outside the country office.
75.
The CAS had a good results framework. It focused on a few key indicators, some drawn
directly from the country’s own strategy monitoring framework and CPAF. This eased monitoring as data
would be available through different government agencies and the EDPRS’ central monitoring team at
MINECOFIN.
76.
A final lesson is that adequate stakeholder engagement is essential to enhance results and
outcomes. The Rwanda Country Survey 2012, demonstrated strong appreciation by different stakeholders
of the Bank’s engagement. Recognition was made of its strong engagement in policy dialogue and
commitment to supporting different government programs in order to achieve results and development
outcomes.

26

Annex Table 3: Summary of CAS Program Self-evaluation

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

Promoting Rwanda’s Economic Transformation for Sustained Growth
Outcome 1.1:
Agricultural production–
particularly for food
crops–sustainably raised.
 Production of rice in
targeted marshlands
increased by at least
100% by 2012 relative
to the baseline (8,757
tons). [2009.]

Achieved

 Achieved. [18,675 tons
by October 31, 2012.]
The target was achieved
at 113%. Baseline was
finalized once all
marshlands to be
developed under the
project were approved,
which was by MTR.

 At least 1,400 additional hectares of
irrigated marshlands have been
rehabilitated or developed by 2010
(EDPRS/PSTA indicator).
Achieved. [3,324 additional hectares
were developed by October 2012 - 6434
ha total from the 2008 baseline of 3,110
ha.]
The target was achieved at 100%. RSSP
2 brought 3,324 ha of new marshland
into operation. Nine sites were
developed under RSSP 2, including
seven sites rehabilitated or extended and
two sites newly developed. Eight dams
were built in five sites, while on other
sites, only rehabilitation works took
place.
 At least 4,200 additional hectares of
hillsides have been sustainably
developed by 2010 (EDPRS/PSTA
indicator).
Achieved. [10,096 additional ha by
October 2012 for a total of 24,581 ha
from the 2008 baseline of 14,485 ha.]
The target was achieved at 102%.
During RSSP 2, 10,096 additional ha

IDA Closed:
 The strong, demonstrated
 RSSP II (FY08)
commitment of Government at
various levels, and effective
 Integrated Management
mechanisms to sustain that
of Eco-Systems – GEF
commitment, are vital for success
(FY05)
and essential to embark on a
IDA Ongoing:
scaling up phase. Throughout
 RSSP III (FY12)
RSSP 2, Government provided
 Land Management,
strategic guidance and enacted
Water Harvesting &
laws that continue to sustain
Hillside Irrigation
advances under the RSSP series.
(FY10)
 Close implementation support by
 PRSG/C series
the Bank and sector was invaluable
Others (IFC & Trust
for resolving implementation
Funds):
challenges. A full-time Bank
 GAFSP additional
international staff member in the
financing to LWH
field and fulltime local staff
(FY10)
dedicated to supporting
 USAID/CIDA additional
implementation gave the client
financing to LWH
continuous access to the Bank, and
(FY11)
issues were resolved rapidly and
 IFC investment in
responsively.
Bakhresa

The marshland investment model
AAA:
developed in RSSP offers a basic
 Multi-year Agricultural
framework for replication
Policy TA (FY08 –

27

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

 At least 50% of farmers
in targeted areas have
adopted sustainable
marshland or hillside
intensification
technologies by 2012
(2008 baseline 25%).

 Increase in use of
Mineral Fertilizer from
14,000 MT in 2006 to
47,600 MT in
2011/2012. [Revised

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

 Achieved.
[Farmers’ adoption of
sustainable technologies
was measured directly in
the Impact Assessment
survey (2012). By the end
of the RSSP 2, 98 percent
of the beneficiary farmers
had adopted at least two
improved practices]
 Achieved.
[46,000 MT of fertilizer
used in 2011/2012.]

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

(for a total of 24,581 ha) were protected
against soil erosion using erosion
control structures such as terraces,
conservation tillage, and contour
bunding or by planting permanent crops
or permanent vegetation. The baseline
includes all hillside ha developed by
RSSP 1 (August 2008)
 Milestones to increase farmer access
to finance.
Achieved. [The PRSG series supported
the operationalization of a microfinance
credit fund.]
 Extension Strategy fully
operationalized in 30 districts by
2009.
Not Applicable. [According to PRSGV,
Belgium took the lead to support
extension services.] Dropped.
 Common SLM Programmatic
Framework Roadmap and Country
SLM Investment Framework (CSIF)
developed by 2010.
Partially Achieved. [TerrAfrica
indicator – status unclear.

 A charter for fertilizer
importers/wholesalers, dealers,
retailers is developed in Rwanda by
2009.
Achieved. [PRSGVI supported the

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

FY12)
 Sustainable Land
Management
(TerrAfrica; FY10)
 Regional Agriculture
Research TA (FY09)
Other Donors:
 IFAD, EU, Belgium,
AfDB, UK, US,
Netherlands, Japan

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

throughout Rwanda.
 Approaches that enhance farmers’
business skills, promote value
chains, and link farmers to
financial institutions provide
inclusive, sustainable benefits
 A programmatic approach
(financing mechanism) is
advantageous to consolidate, scale
up, and sustain project benefits
from a previous phase, while
ensuring clear criteria and
initiatives for new interventions.
 It is difficult to leverage
coordination and resources across
sectors without clearly defining
the roles and establishing a priori
the required commitment for intersectoral coordination. It is also
important to build capacity and
raise awareness on the functions
of wetlands for particular sectors,
and to the economy as a whole. In
the IMCE project, the lack of
inter-sectoral coordination was
part of the reason that it was
changed from a partially-blended
to a standalone GEF operation.
Operations blending GEF and
IDA financing should be
examined carefully during
preparation for viability and
implications on design and
implementation arrangements.

28

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

CPAF Indicator]

Outcome 1.2:
Improved access to and
quality of key
infrastructure services.
Transport:
 50% of paved roads in
good condition (average
IRI less than 4m/km) by
2012 up from 23% in
2007.
 Population having
access to paved roads
o Kigali: from 59%
in 2005 to 69% in
2009 and onwards;
o Huye: from 12%
in 2005 to 22% in
2009 and onwards.

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

development of an action plan for a
private sector-led fertilizer distribution
system.]
Achieved

Transport:
 Achieved.
[Joint Transport
 83 km of the Kigali-Ruhengeri section
Working Group report
of Kigali-Gisenyi road rehabilitated.
of 2011 indicates that
Achieved. [The rehabilitation of the
95 % of the paved road
Kigali-Ruhengeri road was completed
network is in good
in September 2012 and the road is
condition].
serving the target population along the
regional corridor.]
 Achieved.
[Kigali 70%; Huye 47%  550 km of paved trunk roads
maintained by 2011.
as of December 2009.]
Since 2006 IDA support  Complete and adopt the Transport
has enabled the
Master Plan (TMP) by 2010. (CPAF
Rwandan cities of
policy action.)
Kigali, Huye and
Not achieved. [Preparation of
Musanze to improve
Transport Master Plan was completed
service provision to
in September 2012.Completion and
their citizens. For
adoption of the TMP is a FY12 CPAF
example, in Kigali and
policy action.]
Huye, 535,580 people
 Complete District/Rural Road
have gained access to
Condition Inventory by 2009 (CPAF
paved roads. In
policy action).
Musanze, 70,258 people
Partially achieved. [Road condition
have gained access to
inventory for all classified district
an improved health
roads has been completed in
center, school and
2009/2010. However, no data has
multipurpose hall
been collected for rural roads. Road
facilities. By 2009, 15condition inventory]

IDA Closed:
 PIGU (FY05)
IDA Ongoing:
 Transport Sector
Development Project
(FY08) incl. Africa
Catalytic Growth Fund
 Regional: East Africa
Trade and Transport
Facilitation Project
(FY06)
 PRSG/C series
Others (IFC):
 IFC investment in
Intraspeed Rwanda
Other Donors:
 AfDB, China, EC,

 The City Contract approach can be
an efficient tool to facilitate
improvements in service delivery
and municipal and urban
management, and to accompany
decentralization, even within a
limited timeframe. The City
Contract approach is flexible and
proved highly effective in
focusing activities on results in a
context marked by a combination
of lack of capacity and rapidly
evolving decentralization.
 Bank safeguard policies can be
used as a basis for a constructive
dialogue on management of social
and environmental impacts of
development efforts in general,
bringing about changes that reach
beyond the project context.

29

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

27 percent of municipal
budgets were allocated
to infrastructure and
facilities maintenance,
from a baseline in 2006
of 2.5 percent in Kigali
City, 2 percent in Huye
district and 7 percent in
Musanze district. This
increase demonstrates
the improved ability of
these cities to continue
to deliver and maintain
services to their
inhabitants.

Energy:
 Reduction of
unplanned outages
(outages in minutes per
month) from 2,530 (in
2006) to 1,898 from
2009 onwards.
Achieved
 120,000 additional
households connected
to electricity by 2012
(2006 Baseline 91,332)
(CPAF). Achieved

 Achieved. [As of endDecember 2009 there
has been no load
shedding in the
Electrogaz Network.]

 Achieved. [Number
of electricity
subscriptions was
332,000 by December
2012.]

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

 Implementation of priority
district/rural road maintenance
program launched by end 2009.
Achieved. [Program was launched
and implementation is ongoing.
MININFRA, under the TSDP, has
created a total of 283 cooperatives of
road side dwellers and trained 11,322
rural people to carry out routine
maintenance works. RTDA and RMF
have concluded maintenance contracts
with LCAs, in a form of community
contracting for maintenance of about
801 km of roads that has engaged
3,041 people. In addition, LCAs are
carrying out maintenance works on
two multi-year maintenance
contracts.]
Energy:
 Jabana Thermal power plant (20
MW) in service by 2009.
Achieved.[Jabana power plant
became operational in May 2009]
 Birembo substation completed and in
service by 2009.
Achieved. [Birembo substation was
completed in 2009 and is in service.]
 SWAP in the energy sector in place
and first investment prospects
financed by 2009.
Achieved. [SWAP MOU signed in
July 2008 and investment prospects
signed.]
 Improved tariff structure in place (i.e.

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

IDA Closed:
 UERP (FY05)
IDA Ongoing:
 Electricity Access
(FY10)
 PRSG/C series
IDA Pipeline:
 Energy Additional
Financing (FY13)
Others (IFC, MIGA &
Trust Funds):
 MIGA Guarantee to
ContourGlobal/KivuWat
t Ltd. ( FY11)
Other Donors:
 EC, AfDB Netherlands,

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

Clearly demonstrating the benefits
of a market-based land valuation
and participatory approach to
determining compensation led to
changed approaches to slum
upgrading and resettlement, with a
focus on the needs of the affected
populations.
 Delegated contract management
arrangements proved to be
efficient in delivering quick
results on the ground in the
Rwandan context, where the
Government has an express desire
to keep the administration lean
and the numbers of permanent
staff on the government payroll to
a minimum.
 Electricity shortages need to be
addressed from both supply side
(generation) and demand side
(energy efficiency) as they
complement each other.
 In countries and sectors with
limited experience and
institutional capacity, the WBG
can provide considerable value
added by decentralizing project
supervision and implementation
support resources to country
offices. The proximity of the
project TTL to the PCU
considerably accelerated the pace
of implementation and

30

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

ICT:
 ICT composite network
coverage increased from
75% in 2006 to 100% in
2012.

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

 Achieved.
[82% national coverage
-100% in urban areas
and 79% in rural areas]

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

eliminates cross-subsidies from
water, reflects cost structure of
electricity, and differentiates between
different customer types) by end
2009.
Achieved. [Tariff study completed in
October 2010. Adoption of different
customer categories ongoing. Crosssubsidies to be addressed after
corporate reforms of EWSA expected
by end of 2013.]
 Billing to supply ratio raised from
78% to 84% from 2009 onwards.
Achieved. [Collection ratio raised to
95% by June, 2013 according to
EWSA operating statistics]
ICT:
 Technical, financial and corporate
structure of Backbone system in
place by 2010.
Achieved.
 At least 10 public internet access
points developed by eRwanda by
2010.
Achieved. [A total of 34 access
points developed by 2010: 22 for
public usage; 12 for use by local
governments.]
 Price of wholesale international E1
capacity link decreased by 20% by
2010.
Achieved. [28% reduction – from
US$10,000 in 2008 to US$7,200 in
2010]

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Belgium, GTZ

IDA Closed:
 eRwanda (FY06)
IDA Ongoing:
 RCIP II (FY09)
Other Donors:
SIDA, EU, DfID, USAID,
UNDP, Belgium, South
Korea

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

disbursement of funds while
further leveraging the results
towards new Bank operations

 Top-level political leadership
support and commitment from
every level of the government led
to Rwanda’s ICT success.
 The eRwanda project was a
“boutique” eGovernment project
that was small, innovative and
unique at the World Bank. The
ICT buses are an innovative
solution to reach to people in rural
areas.

31

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

Outcome 1.3:
Improved environment
for sound private sector
development.
Financial Sector
 International Financial
and Reporting Standards
implemented by all
financial institutions by
2012.

Achieved

 Time to process a check
reduced from 3 days
(2008) to 1 day in 2012.

 Achieved. [Check
processing takes 1 day
since 2012.]

Business Environment

 Achieved. [According

 Achieved. [ICPAR is
responsible for
disseminating the IFRS.
IFRS were implemented
by all banks and are
under implementation
phase in the nonbanking financial
sector.]

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

IDA Closed

 The Business Plan Competition

Financial Sector
 ICPAR assisted in implementing new
accounting law and standards by
2010.
Partially achieved. [ICPAR was
created in early 2009, and started to
organize training on auditing and
standards. Its capacity is still very
low.]
 Automated clearing house (ACH)
and Real Time Gross Settlement
implemented to modernize the
payment system by 2010.
Achieved. [A real time settlement
system (Rwanda Integrated Payments
Processing System -RIPPS),
encompassing the Automated
Clearing House (ACH), the Real
Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and
the Central Securities Depository was
implemented and went live in
February 11.]
 Leasing Law amendment adopted by
cabinet by 2009 (IFC).
Achieved
 8 Financial Institutions launching
leasing products by 2009 (IFC).
Achieved.
Business Environment

32

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

 Number of days
required to obtain a
construction license
reduced from 275 days
(2007) to 180 by 2012
(IFC).

 Time required to export
reduced from 60 days
(2007) to 40 days in
2012 (IFC).

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

to the World Bank’s
Doing Business report
2013, getting a
construction permit now
takes 164 days. Rwanda
made dealing with
construction permits
easier by passing new
building regulations at
the end of April 2010
and implementing new
time limits for the
issuance of different
permits]
 Achieved. [29 days in
2012. In 2009, extended
opening hours,
implementation or
improvement of
electronic data
interchange (EDI) or
risk-based inspections
in the, transportation
sector, led to a
reduction in export and
import time. In 2010,
Rwanda improved
trading times with
administrative changes
such as increased
operating hours and
enhanced cooperation at
the border along with
the removal of some

 Licensing system simplified by
reducing the number of overall
licenses from more than 300 in 2008
to 250 by 2010 (IFC).
Achieved. [The number of licenses
was 185 as of October 2010.]
 14 Commercial Laws updated in line
with international best practice by
2010.
Partially achieved. [13 commercial
laws were reviewed, finalized and
enacted. Under the CEDP project,
three fully functional commercial
court and an Arbitration Centre to
settle business disputes and reduce
the time taken to enforce court
decisions. Time taken to settle a
commercial dispute in the
Commercial Court was reduced from
394 days in 2003 to 230 days in
2011. IFC also supported the review,
as from 2008, on areas that focused
specifically on the Doing Business
indicators. As a consequence, the
time and cost to set up a business
significantly decreased and Rwanda
was ranked 8th globally in the 2012
Doing Business Report in the
‘Starting a Business’ indicator. The
Competition and Consumer
Protection Law have been adopted
and a competition authority
established at MINICOM; Draft bill
on provisions applicable on privately

 Competitiveness and
Enterprise Dev. &
Additional Financing
(FY08)
IDA Ongoing:
 Governance for
Competitiveness TA
Project (FY12)
 PRSG/C series
Others (IFC& MIGA):
 IFC Leasing
Development Program
(FY 07)
 IFC investment in Hotel
Milles Collines
 IFC investment in
Tourism Promotion
Services
 IFC investment in
Ecobank
 FIRST Initiative: second
Phase (FY09)
AAA:
 Financial Sector
Assessment Program
(FSAP) update (FY11)
 Multi-year Just-in-time
Policy Notes (FY09-12)
 Employment and
Growth Policy Note
(FY11)
 Study on EAC (FY11)
 Investment Climate
Assessment (FY09)

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

enabled potential entrepreneurs
throughout Rwanda to be aware of
the support services provided to
SMEs to start their project.
Through this competition,
participating SMEs were given
mentoring and hand holding
services to conceptualize their
business ideas and prepare
bankable projects.
 Rwanda was positioned as a
pocket of excellence in doing
business reforms and would
facilitate the replication of the
successful reform experiences
across the region through bilateral
and regional South-South
Exchange programs.


33

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

documentation
requirement for
importers and exporters.
In 2011, Rwanda
reduced the number of
trade documents
required and enhanced
its joint border
management procedures
with Uganda and other
neighbors leading to an
improvement in the
trade logistics
environment.]

Skills Development
 Primary school pupil to
qualified teacher ratio
reduced from 73:1 in
2006 to 61:1 in 2012
(CPAF).

 Mostly Achieved.
[62:1 in 2012 versus
67:1 in 2008. The ratio
increased from 58:1 in
2011. This was despite
2,344 teachers having
been recruited in
2011/12 and progress
having been made on
policy actions of
establishing a package
of incentives for
teachers. The latter was
approved and includes a
10% salary rise and
ongoing construction of
416 houses to

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

financed infrastructure and the
Contract Law are still in the process
of being updated.]

Skills Development
 National Skills Development Policy,
including a Post-Basic Education
policy in place by 2010.
Achieved. [Education Sector
Strategic Plan for 2010-2015
finalized in 2010.]
 National Skills audit completed by
2009.
Achieved. [Skills audit completed in
2009.]
 3,000 teachers hired on contract basis
until TDM adopted.
Not achieved. [2,000 teachers hired
by 2008, but only 750 in early 2009.]

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

Advisory Services IFC:
 Entrepreneurship and
SME Development
Program
 Investment Climate
Reform Program
 Efficient Securities
Markets Institutional
Development (ESMID)
 Credit Reporting
program
 Privatization of Rwanda
Air
Other Donors
AfDB, DfID, USAID,
Netherlands
IDA Closed:
 HRDP (FY00)
IDA Ongoing:
 Skills Development
(FY11)
 PRSG/C series

Others (IFC):
 IFC Africa Schools
Rwanda Program
(FY09)
Other Donors
 AfDB, DfID, Belgium,

34

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)



Transition from basic
education (TC) to
upper secondary
education raised from
82% in 2006 to 92% in
2012 (CPAF)



Skills Development
indicator TBD as part
of the planned ESW
and the new operation.
[Will insert once
developed.]

Outcome 1.4:
Capacity to manage
public resources–at
central and local levels–
strengthened
 Proportion of audited
public agencies
receiving unqualified
public audit opinions
increased from 1.7% in

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

accommodate 3,328
teachers. The increase
in the ratio is attributed
to primary school
teacher moving to teach
at secondary level,
going for further studies
to upgrade their skill
and some leaving the
profession.]
 Achieved. [96% in
2011/12. The target was
achieved as a result of
the implementation of
the 12 Years Basic
Education (12YBE)
Strategy]
 Not developed
Dropped

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

 Develop and cost Teacher
Development and Management
(TDM) Strategic Plan by 2010.

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

Netherlands, UNICEF,
EU

Achieved. [TDM was adopted in
2009.]
 Targets for classrooms rehabilitation
and constructions under EFA FTI
financing met.
Achieved. [Increase in classroom
constructions from 2,315 in 2008 to
3,076 in 2010.]
 Targets for procured textbooks under
EFA FTI financing met.
Achieved. [Purchase and distribution
of over 1.6 million textbooks between
2009-2010.]
 Targets for trained teachers under
EFA FTI financing met.
Achieved. [Exact targets were not
available, but EFA-FTI contributed to
increase in training of teachers,
inspectors, directors and parent
teacher associations.]

Partially Achieved

IDA Closed;
 Not Achieved. [5%, Dec Overall effectiveness/service delivery
 The successful implementation of
2011.]
 Increased number of MDAs that have  PSCBP (FY05)
policy and institutional reforms
service delivery directories published.  MDTF for PFM Reforms
requires adequate capacity in key
Achieved. [21 out of 40 in 2010 from
areas. This factor will need special
(FY05)
zero in 2008.]
attention in the formulation of

35

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)







Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

2009 to 7% in 2011.
[Revised Indicator]
Proportion of the value  Not Achieved. [75% of
of procurement tendered the value of procurement
competitively or
tendered competitively
justified increased from
or justified in 2011/12
86% in 2008 to 89% in
FY12 (CPAF).
[Revised Indicator]
Finalization of a new
 Partially Achieved
national payment and
[Approval of P&R policy
retention policy by
by Cabinet was done in
2011. [New Indicator]
Feb. 2012.]
Percentage of Districts  Achieved. [100% in
which achieve a
2011/12.]
minimum of 80% of
their service delivery
and sustainable local
development targets
for which they are
responsible as assessed
by/in the IMIHIGO
assessment report
increased from 60% in
2006 to 75% in 2012
(CPAF). [Revised
Indicator.]

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

 MIFOTRA agrees with all PRSG
ministries on staffing levels and
ministerial structures for optimal
performance within fiscal limits.
Achieved.
PFM
 Increased number of budget agencies
that produce annual financial
statements within stipulated timeframe.
Achieved. [In 2011 100% of budget
agencies produced statements – 75%
on time from 17% in 2008.]
 Number of projects from the district
development plans implemented under
the DCDP (disaggregated by type).
Achieved. [Select facilities built or
rehabilitated by type under the project
are: health: 11; classrooms: 420; Water
tanks: 131.]

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

future programs.
 DCDP (FY04)
 Public sector reform requires
 eRwanda (FY07)
flexibility, and Bank instruments
IDA Ongoing:
do not always allow for that.
 PRSG/C series
Public sector reforms heavily
Others (Trust Funds)
depend on the political economy
 Economic Empowerment
in which they operate and there
of Young Women –
will always be winners and losers
Adolescent Growth
in a reform process. Strategic
Initiative
directions can rapidly change after
 Statistics for Results
ministerial changes, or as
(FY12)
government ministries are
 Social Risk Management
restructured. This has can affect
of Climate Change
the commitment to the reforms
AAA:
and the project development
 Public Expenditure
objectives
Management (Multi-year)

Project designs which involve
 Capacity Building (FY11)
community-driven development
Other Donors:
processes need to nurture and
 DFID, UNDP, Belgium,
support the huge potential that
GTZ, SIDA, USAID.
exists at the community level.
However, it is unrealistic to think
that communities have the
infrastructure and fiduciary
capacity to deliver services and
monitor progress without
significant training and continuous
guidance. Future project designs
should consider what communities
are willing and able to contribute
instead of setting rigid criteria
(e.g. x percent contribution to civil
works) which does not
acknowledge the diversity of

36

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

communities both across and
within countries.
Decrease Social Vulnerability
Outcome 2.1:
Significant health and
social risks–to vulnerable
groups and to social
cohesion in Rwanda–are
mitigated
Maternal and Child Health
 % of under five
children using
Insecticide Treated
Long Lasting mosquito
nets increases from
16% in 2006 to 85% in
2012 (CPAF)
 % of assisted births in
an accredited health
facility increased from
28% in 2006 to at least
60% in 2012 (CPAF).
=

Social
Protection/Implementation
of Vision 2020 Umurenge
program
 Percentage of eligible
households granted
public works in a

Achieved

 Not Achieved. [72.4%
of children under five
were using LLIN in
2010. DHS, 2010.

Maternal and Child Health
 Pilot reducing “ticket moderateur” and
introducing conditional cash transfers
for children less than 5 and pregnant
women by 2010.
Achieved. [As of October 2010 a pilot
initiative removing “ticket
moderateur” for children under five
Achieved.
[66.6% in has been implemented in two health
centers in two districts. Pregnant
DHS, 2010.]
women are exempted from paying the
“ticket moderateur”.]
 Annual per capita allocation to
Performance Based Financing (PBF)
for health facilities and community
health cooperatives reaches US$ 2.25
by 2010 (CPAF).
Achieved. [US$2.99 in 2011/12.]
Social Protection/Implementation of
 Achieved. [54% of
eligible households were Vision 2020 Umurenge program
employed in 2011/12.]
 Participatory Assessment is completed
by end 2009 of whether incomegenerating activities, direct support,
public works and micro credits have
been successful.

IDA Closed;
 DCDP (FY04)
 CLSG/C series
Ongoing:
 Support To Social
Protection System series
 PRSG/C series
 RDRP2 (FY10)
AAA:
 Rwanda Health Study
(FY08)
 Human Resources for
Health (FY08)
 Social Protection Study
(FY08)
 Youth and Gender in
post-conflict (FY08)
 Social Risk Management
of Climate Change
(FY11)
 Youth Employment Study
(FY12)
 On Demand Policy Notes
in the Social Sectors

 The programmatic approach to the
VUP support by donors and
Rwanda Government facilitated
strong results on the ground. While
this approach presents significant
donor coordination demands and
challenges, results proved
beneficial to all stakeholders and
allowed timely and quality response
to Government demands as
program implementation expanded.
 Targeting is a key element of
implementing successful social
protection interventions.
 Continuous systems analysis and
taking corrective action should be
part and parcel of the
implementation process.
 Valuable lessons can be learned
from a process evaluation of pilot
implementation
 Capacity building through learning
by doing process was effective both
to the Community Development
Committees (CDCs), communities

37

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

sample of VUP pilot
Sectors is 35% each
year in 2008-2012.
(CPAF) [Revised
Indicator.]

Reintegration of excombatants
 Up to 26,675 RDF and
11,292 Armed Group
members and
dependents received
reinsertion and/or
reintegration support
by 2012. [Updated
Indicator.]

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

Partially achieved. [M&E survey was
conducted and report is being finalized.
The survey was not participatory.]
 Lessons of VUP pilot in 30 sectors are
incorporated and extended to at least
another 60 sectors by end 2009.
Achieved. [Lesson have been
incorporated and extended to 90
sectors.]
 Procedures for identifying vulnerable
households, mode and amount of
social assistance transfers and public
works implemented by end 2009.
Achieved. [Procedures have been
agreed, incorporated in operational
manuals for each of the VUP
components and are being
implemented.]

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

(TBD)
Other Donors:
UNICEF, Belgium, DFID,
Germany, USAID, SIDA

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

and local government staff.
 Participatory processes promote
demand side governance.
 Parallel technical assistance support
to a development policy lending
operation is key to successful
reforms.

 Achieved. [All 26,585
RDF and 10,640 AG
demobilized by Nov. 30,
2012 (RDF -22,675
during the previous
project – 3910 during
the current project, since
2009 and AG -7091
from previous project
3,549 from current project
- since 2009)
From January 1, 2009 to
November 30, 2012, a
total of 7,459 excombatants have been
demobilized, including

38

CAS Outcomes/Cluster of
Outcomes and Outcome
Indicators
(baseline and targets)

Outcomes
Status at CAS CR

Milestones
Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-lending
Activities that contributed
to the outcome

Lessons and Suggestions for the new
CAS

3,910 from RDF and
3,549 from Armed
Groups.
Over the same period, a
total of 7,282
reintegration grants have
been provided to excombatants, including to
125 ex-combatants
demobilized under the
previous project.]

39

2009

2010

Annex Table 4: Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries (FY09-13)
CAS PLANS (08/07/2009)
STATUS
US$(M
)
IDA
Poverty Reduction Strategy Grant (PRSG) V
70.0 Actual
Health/Social Protection DPL
6.0 Actual (Community Living Standard Grant I)
Electricity Access Roll-Out
40.0 Forwarded to FY10
Lake Kivu Methane Guarantee
5.0 Dropped
Rwanda Demobilization and Reintegration Program
8.0 Forwarded to FY10
Regional: Communications Infrastructure Project
8.0 Actual
Subtotal
PRSG VI
Land Husbandry Water Harvesting & Hillside Irrigation.
Transport Sector Development Project (Additional
Financing)
Rural Roads
Regional: East Africa Road Network
Regional: L.Victoria Environmental Management Project

137.0
86.0
35.0
25.0
25.0
8.0
7.0

186.0

2011

Subtotal
Subtotal FY2009-2010
PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (02/09/2011)
PRSG VII
Regional: Rusumo Falls Hydro
Regional: E. Africa Power Market

Subtotal

US$(M
)
IDA
80.0
6.0
8.0

Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY11
FY12 (Transport Sector Project)
FY12 (East Africa Transport Links)
Forwarded to FY11
Additional Actuals
Second Emerg. Demob. & Reint. Proj (from FY09)
Electricity Access Roll-Out (from FY09)
Community Living Standard Grant (CLSG) II
Regional: E. Africa Public Health Laboratories.(not in
CAS)

323.0

94.0
86.0
34.0
8.0
70.0
6.0
5.0
209.0
303.0

STATUS
81.0
10.0
4.0

95.0

Actual
Forwarded to FY13
Forwarded to FY12
Additional Actuals
Transport Sector Development Project (AF)
Skills Development Project (from FY12)
Community Living Standards Grant III
Regional: L. Victoria Env’tal Management Proj. (from
FY10)

40

104.4
11.0
30.0
6.0
5.0
156.4

2012

CAS PLANS (08/07/2009)
PRSF VIII
Agriculture (Additional Financing)
Energy (Additional Financing)
Skills Development

70.0
30.0
30.0
10.0

STATUS
Actual
Rural Sector Support Project, Third APL
Forwarded to FY13
Already in FY11

125.0
80.0
-

Additional Actuals
Support to Social Protection Systems DPL (not in CAS)
Governance for Competitiveness TA Project (not in CAS)
Subtotal
Subtotal FY2011-2012
2013

PRSF IX
Second Support to Social Protection Systems PDL
Rural Roads
Energy (Additional Financing)
Regional: Rusumo Falls Hydro

Subtotal FY2013
Total FY2009-2013

140.0
235.0
90.0
10.0
45.0
60.0
10.0

Reprogrammed (Quality of Decentralized Service Delivery)
Actual
Forwarded to FY14
Actual
Forwarded to FY14

40.0
5.0
250
406.4
50.0
50.0
60.0
-

215.0

160.0

773.0.0

869.4

41

Annex Table 5: Planned Non-lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY09-13)
CAS PLANS (08/07/2009)
2009

2010

2011

2012

Multi-year Public Expenditure Management
TA
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Investment Climate Assessment
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis
Regional Agriculture Research TA
Multi-year Public Expenditure Management
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis
Sustainable Land Management (TerrAfrica)
Procurement and Financial Management
Assessment

PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (02/09/2011)
Multi-year Public Expenditure Management
TA
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis
Country Economic Memorandum

Multi-year Public Expenditure Management
TA
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis

STATUS
Actual
Additional Products
Multi-year Just-in-time Policy Notes (FPD)
Health Study
Rwanda Payment System
Telecoms Sector Policy Dialogue TA
Forwarded to FY11
Dropped
Additional Products
Financial Sector Development Project (FSDP) II
Education Country Status Report
Social Protection Study
Petroleum Exploration Capacity Building
Support to PPP in ICT Sector
DeMPA Assessment
STATUS
Dropped
Actual
Additional Products
Sustainable Land Management
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) update
Employment and Growth Policy Note (Dropped)
Capacity Building (Rwanda Capacity Filter –Sector
Analysis)
Poverty Monitoring (Dropped)
Post-Basic Education Study
Social Risk Management to Climate Change
Health System Strengthening
Rwanda Economic Update
Policy Guidance via Just in time Policy Notes (FPD)
Implementing Risk-based On-site Inspection of the
Insurance Sector
TA for Rwanda Energy Sector
Rwanda Investment Promotion TA
Additional Products
Financial Sector assessment Update
Youth Employment Study
On Demand Policy Note in Social Sectors
Social Safety Nets Strengthening TA
Rwanda Economic Updates
Improving Delivery of Affordable Urban Housing in
Rwanda
Rwanda ICR ROSC
Land Sector Study
PPAIF – Independent Review of Rwanda’s Energy
Generation Investments

42

CAS PLANS (08/07/2009)
2013

Multi-year Just-in-time Policy Notes (FPD)
Rwanda Economic Updates
MTDS Rwanda
Health System Strengthening – HRBF pilot
activities Impact Evaluation
Rwanda Fiscal Decentralization

STATUS
FY14
Rwanda Economic Updates
Health System Strengthening – HRBF pilot activities
Impact Evaluation

43

Annex Table 6: Ongoing Portfolio at CAS Completion (June 30, 13)
Country
Name
Rwanda

Rwanda
Africa

Africa

Project
ID

Board
Approval

Orig
Closing

08/28/2007
10/15/2009
10/15/2009
08/27/2009
12/22/2009
03/29/2011
03/06/2012
02/22/2011
03/01/2012
01/26/2012

06/30/2012
01/31/2014
01/31/2014
12/31/2012
06/30/2014
05/31/2016
06/30/2014
12/31/2015
10/30/2017
04/30/2015

12/31/2013
01/31/2014
06/30/2016
12/31/2013
12/31/2015
05/31/2016
06/30/2014
12/31/2015
10/30/2017
04/30/2015

P116360

RW-Transport Sector Development
RW - Sustainable Energy Dev. Proj (GEF)
Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj.
RW Emergency Demob and Reintegration
RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig
RW: Skills Development Project (FY11)
Rwanda SFR
Rwanda Land, husbandry water harvesting
RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project
Governance & Competitiveness TA Proj
RW-Promoting Economic Empowerment of
Adolescent Girls and Young Women

09/12/2011

06/30/2014

06/30/2014

P079734
P106369
P111556
P118316
P121611

3A-E Afr Trade & Transp Facil (FY06)
RCIP - Phase 2 - Rwanda Project
3A-East Afr Publ Hlth Laborat Net (FY10)
3A-Lake Victoria Phase II, APL 2
Fin Sec Dev + Regionalization Proj-FSDRP

01/24/2006
09/30/2008
05/25/2010
06/13/2011
01/31/2011

09/30/2011
01/31/2014
03/30/2016
06/30/2017
03/30/2014

09/30/2014
01/31/2014
09/30/2017
06/30/2017
03/30/2014

P079414
P097818
P111567
P112712
P114931
P118101
P124629
P124785
P126440
P127105

Project Short Name

Rev Closing

Net
Comm
Amt
($m)
22
8.3
130
8
34
30
10
50
80
5

IDA Net
Comm
Amt
($m)
22
0
130
8
34
30
0
0
80
5

2.7
380
229.02
24
78.66
30
16
377.68

0
309
229.02
24
78.66
30
16
377.68

8.6
1.8
11.4
0.1
8.4
0.6
5.6
13.3
14.7
1.1

Tot
Undisb
Begin
FY ($m)
14.9
5.3
36.6
1.2
23.6
27.0
10.0
39.5
77.4
4.9

0.3
65.9
17.6
5.2
15.6
0.6
1.6
40.6

2.1
242.5
134.6
16.7
66.2
26.7
14.2
258.4

Disb in
FY
($m)

IDA
Undisb
Bal ($m)

15.3
4.8
44.6
6.9
17.4
2.6
5.6
23.8
15.6
1.1

6.3
3.5
84.1
1.1
15.1
26.4
4.4
26.2
62.8
3.8

0.0
199.7
117.1
11.5
50.6
26.1
12.5
217.8

0.7
138.4
120.1
11.8
27.8
1.9
3.5
165.0

1.9
235.7
117.1
11.5
50.6
26.1
12.5
217.8

Rwanda
Committed - IFC($M)
FY08

FY09
20.8

FY10
29.5

FY11
32.2

FY12
54.2

FY13
56.8

FY14
41.8

41.5

Committed - B Loan Participant ($M)
FY08
Rwanda
Total

FY09

FY10

FY11

FY12

FY13

Tot
Undisb
Bal ($m)

6.3
0.0
84.1
1.1
15.1
26.4
0.0
0.0
62.8
3.8

Annex Table 7: IFC Investment Operations Program

Rwanda

Tot
Disb
($m)

FY14

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

20.8

29.5

32.2

54.2

56.8

41.8

41.5

44

DO
Rati
ng

IP
Rati
ng

S
S
S
S
S
MS
S
S
S
S

MS
S
S
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
S

#

#

MU
S
S
MS
MU

MU
MS
MS
MS
MU

Annex Table 8: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Portfolio

45

FY

Annex Table 9: MIGA Guarantees
Project name
Sector
Gross
Exposure ($)

2012

ContourGlobal KivuWatt Infrastructure

2012

Bakhresa Grain Milling
(Rwanda) Limited

Manufacturing 2,700,000

S.S.A. Bakhresa, M.S. Bakhresa
and A.S.S. Bakhresa

2012

Bakhresa Grain Milling
(Rwanda) Limited

Manufacturing 9,690,000

S.S.A. Bakhresa, M.S. Bakhresa
and A.S.S. Bakhresa

2012

Bakhresa Grain Milling
(Rwanda) Limited

Manufacturing 2,375,000

S.S.A. Bakhresa, M.S. Bakhresa
and A.S.S. Bakhresa

TOTAL

95,377,709

Guarantee Holder
ContourGlobal Africa Holdings
S.a.r.l.

110,142,709

46

Annex 3: A Diagnostic of Growth, Poverty, and Shared Prosperity
1.
During the 2000s, Rwanda has become one of the ten fastest-growing economies in the
world. GDP grew at more than 8 percent per annum between 2001 and 2011, mostly driven by domestic
demand supported by public expenditures financed through foreign aid. Strong growth was translated
into a rapid reduction in poverty from 59 percent in 2001 to 45 percent in 2011. In addition, growth over
the past decade was pro-poor, leading to a modest decline in inequality. Poverty reduction has mainly
been driven by a strong increase in agricultural production and the diversification into non-farm
employment. Nevertheless, the poverty rate remains high, and there is room to address the high levels of
inequality (including in access to service delivery). Sustaining the high rate of growth and poverty
reduction requires shifting from an aid-dependent, public sector-led development process toward growth
driven by the private sector. This shift will happen mainly through addressing constraints to conducive
business climate, effective/efficient use of public resources accompanied by domestic resource
mobilization, investing in human capital, well-managed urbanization, achieving accountable governance
through more effective decentralization to ensure greater equality in public service delivery, and
continued investments in agriculture and social protection.
I.

Trends in Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity

2.

Rwanda achieved solid progress on poverty reduction over the past decade. The share of the
population below a nationally defined basic-needs poverty line dropped from 59 percent in 2001 to 45
percent in 2011 (Annex Figure 11). Extreme poverty, defined as the share of the population living below
the food poverty line, declined by 16 percentage points, from 40 percent in 2001 to 24 percent 10 years
later.19 The decline was accompanied by a reduction in the poverty gap ratio. The distance between the
poor and the poverty line declined from 24 percent in 2001 to 15 percent in 2011 indicating that the poor
are now closer to the poverty line, which bodes well for future poverty reduction (Annex Figure 2).
Annex Figure 1: Poverty in Rwanda is on the
decline

Annex Figure 2: The Poor Have Moved Closer
the Poverty Line between 2001 and 2011

Extreme Poverty Headcount(%)

(Kernel Density Estimation of Household Consumption,
2000 and 2011)

Poverty Headcount (%)

50.0

58.9

56.9

40

35.8

2000/1

2005/6

44.9

Frequency

Poverty Line

100.0

24.1

0.0
2010/11
0

Source: EICV1, EICV2 and EICV3.

50000
100000
150000
200000
Household Consumption per Adult (2011 Prices)

250000

Household Consumption 2001
Household Consumption 2011

3.
Growth over the past decade was pro-poor. The mean growth in household consumption of the
bottom 40 percent between 2001 and 2011 amounted to 3.4 percent per year, exceeding the overall
growth rate of 2.8 percent. Growth was particularly high for the poorest 20 percent of households, which
grew by 3.7 percent per year (Annex Figure 3). The pro-poor pattern of growth resulted in a modest
19

Extreme poverty as defined by the World Bank’s $1.25 a day line stood at 63 percent in 2011.

47

decline in inequality: the Gini coefficient decreased from 0.51 in 2001 to 0.49 in 2011(Annex Figure 4.
Despite the decrease, inequality remains high.

6

Annex Figure 3: The poor grew faster than the
non-poor between 2001 and 2011…
(Growth-Incidence Curve for Rwanda, 2001-2011)

Annex Figure 4: Leading to a reduction in
inequality
(The Gini of inequality)
0.6

5

2000/01 Poverty Headcount

0.55

4

0.5

3

0.507

0.45
Wealthier Households

2

Poor Households

0

20

40
60
80
Percentiles of Consumption (2000/01)

Source: EICV1 and EICV3

100

0.522
0.49

0.4
2001

2006

2011

Source: EICV1, EICV2 and EICV3

4.
The combination of solid growth and inequality reduction boosted shared prosperity. The
shared prosperity indicator, a combination of growth in average incomes and the share accruing to the
bottom 40 percent increased by 37 percent between 2001 and 2011.20 Despite the modest reduction in
inequality, more than three-quarters of the increase in shared prosperity was due to growth and the
remaining quarter was due to the reduction in inequality. Similarly, almost all of the reduction in poverty
(99 percent) over the past decade can be attributed to growth in mean incomes rather than inequality
reduction. Growth has been the main driving force for poverty reduction.
5.
Progress on poverty and shared prosperity can largely be attributed to the strong
performance since 2006. Household consumption growth was pro-rich between 2001 and 2006, leading
to an increase in inequality (Annex Figure 5). As a result, poverty dropped by only two percentage points
during this period (Annex Figure 1) despite household consumption growing at 2 percent per year. Since
2006 however, the distribution of growth changed and benefited the poor more than the non-poor (Annex
Figure 6): the bottom 40 percent grew at an annual rate of 5.4 percent between 2006 and 2011,
substantially faster than 3.7 percent growth rate of the top 60 percent. As a result, inequality decreased
rapidly and poverty fell by an impressive 12 percentage points.

20

Shared prosperity indicator as defined in David Rosenblatt and Tamara J. McGavock, A Note on the simple algebra of the
shared prosperity indicator (Policy Research Working Paper 6645, World Bank, October 2013). The shared prosperity indicator
does not have an intuitive interpretation nor does it have an upper bound. For the sake of completeness, Rwanda’s shared
prosperity indicator increased from 29,650 in 2001 to 40,692 in 2011.

48

Annex Figure 6: While the Poor Grew Faster
than the Non-Poor between 2006 and 2011

(Growth-Incidence Curve for Rwanda, 2001-2006)

(Growth-Incidence Curve for Rwanda, 2006-2011)

8
7
6
5
3

Wealthier Households

0

Poor Households
0

20

40
60
80
Percentiles of Consumption (2000/01)

100

Wealthier Households

Poor Households
0

1

1

2

3

2001 Poverty Headcount

2

2006 Poverty Headcount

4

4

5

6

7

8

Annual Growth in Consumption (%)

9

9

10

10

Annex Figure 5: The Non-Poor Grew Faster
than the Poor between 2001 and 2006…

0

Source: EICV2 and EICV3

20

40
60
Consumption Percentiles

80

100

Source: EICV2 and EICV3

6.
The reduction in poverty was accompanied by improvements in non-monetary measures of
welfare as well. The fraction of children between 12 and 23 months with full vaccination coverage
increased from 76 percent in 2000 to 90 percent in 2010, while child mortality rates dropped
spectacularly: under-five mortality more than halved from 196 (per 1,000 live births) in 2000 to 76 in
2010 and infant mortality decreased from 107 to 50 (Annex Figure 7). Access to education improved at
both the primary and secondary level, though net attendance in secondary school remains low at 20
percent (despite having doubled since 2000). Despite a modest decline over the past decade, the rate of
chronic malnutrition remains high at 44 percent, jeopardizing human capital accumulation of the future
labor force.
Annex Figure 7: Health and education indicators improved between 2000 and 2010
(Evolution of selected health and education indicators, 2000-2005-2010)

A. Child health

B. Infant and child mortality

100

250
Infant mortality
Under five mortality

90
80

200

70
60

150

50
40

100

30

Children stunted (%)

20

50

Children fully immunized (%)

10
0

0

2000

2005

2010

2000

2005

2010

49

C. Net school attendance
100
90
80
70
60

Net attendance primary school (%)

50

Net attendance secondary school (%)

40
30
20
10
0

2000
2005
Source: DHS, 2000, 2005, 2010

2010

7.
Access to basic services has increased over the past decade. Nevertheless, important
challenges remain to deliver basic services to the poorest citizens (Annex Table 10). Electrification, for
example, has mostly benefitted the wealthiest households. While the proportion of wealthy families with
access to electricity rose from 18 percent in 2006 to 39 percent in 2011, less than 1 percent of households
in the first two quintiles of the income distribution (the poorest 40 percent) have access to electricity. On
the other hand, other services, education, health, and water and sanitation have shown more incomeneutral or even pro-poor increases in access. Access to improved sanitation, in particular, has increased by
more than 50 percent among the poorest 20 percent compared to 12 percent among the richer 20 percent.
Access to safe drinking water has also increased at a (slightly) faster rate among the poor while health
insurance has increased by almost 60 percent in all consumption quintiles, with a slightly more
pronounced increase for women (from 44 percent to 70 percent).
Annex Table 10: Households’ Access to Services (%)
Access to
Services

Electricity

Safe Drinking
Water

Improved
Sanitation

Health
Insurance

2005/06 2010/11 2005/06 2010/11 2005/06 2010/11 2005/06 2010/11

Rwanda

4.3

10.8

70.3

74.2

58.5

74.5

43.3

68.8

Q1

0.0

0.4

66.6

68.4

42.4

64.7

33.2

52.9

Q2

0.2

0.8

66.7

71.4

51.1

72.1

37.6

61.4

Q3

0.1

2.1

67.2

71.5

55.6

71.9

45.5

69.3

Q4

0.6

5.6

68.9

73.2

60.9

74.7

47.7

74.5

Q5

17.8

38.8

79.6

84.0

76.6

85.6

51.5

84.5

Source: EICV 3

8.
Similarly, there is great inequality to access to services across districts. For example, usage
of sector administration provided by sub-district varies from 6 percent in Rusizi District to 98 percent in
Nyabihu District (Annex Table 11). Large differences across districts are also observed in access to health
services (e.g., health centers and district hospitals). The large inequality across districts reiterates the
importance of bringing the state closer to citizens through sustained decentralization efforts.

50

Annex Table 11: Poverty headcount and access to services in 2011

Highest district
(Nyabihu)
Lowest district
(Rusizi)
National average

Poverty
headcount

Population
accessing district
hospital

Population
accessing health
centers

Population accessing
sector administration

73.3%

94.1%

99.0%

97.5%

8.3%

3.2%

31.9%

5.6%

37.8%

91.1%

58.2%

44.9%

Source: EICV 3
9.
The second Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS 2) sets
ambitious poverty targets. The goal is to push the share of the population poor down from 45 percent in
2011 to below 30 percent by the end of 2017 and to reduce the share of the extreme poor from 24 percent
to below 9 percent. Achieving these ambitious targets will require continued strong growth in household
consumption as well as a further reduction in inequality.
10.
Maintaining the progress achieved between 2006 and 2011 would enable Rwanda to attain
the poverty targets of the EDPRS 2. In the absence of inequality reduction, household consumption will
have to grow by 3.6 percent per annum between 2011 and 2017/18 if poverty is to be reduced to 30
percent (horizontal intercept of blue curve in Annex Figure 8).21 This growth rate is higher than the actual
growth in the past decade (2.5 percent) and the growth in the second half of the decade (3.0 percent).
However, if inequality were to drop modestly by 0.7 percent per year between 2011 and 2017/18, annual
consumption growth of 2.6 percent would be sufficient to attain the poverty target. If inequality is reduced
by 1 percent per year (the same rate observed between 2006 and 2011), the poverty target would be
attained with consumption growth of less than 2.3 percent. The extreme poverty target (red curve in
Figure 8) would be attained with an annual growth in household consumption of 2.8 percent and an
annual inequality reduction of 1 percent. This largely corresponds with the performance observed
between 2006 and 2011 (annual consumption growth of 3 percent and inequality reduction of 1 percent,
the red square in Annex Figure 8).

21

These simulations are based on the poverty curves developed by Ferreira and Leite, Policy Options for Meeting the Millennium
Development Goals in Brazil: Can micro-simulations help? (Policy Research Working Paper Series 2975, World Bank, 2003).
The simulations are purely mechanical and we present them for illustrative purposes. They should be interpreted with caution.

51

Annex Figure 8: Inequality Reduction will be Key in Attaining the EDPRS 2 Poverty Targets
(Combination of Growth and Redistribution Required to Meet the 2017/18 Targets)
2017/18 Poverty Target

2017/18 Extreme Poverty Target

Annual Pace of Inequality
Reduction (%)

3.5
3

2.5
Performance 2006-2011

2

1.5
1

0.5
0
0

1
2
3
4
5
Annual Growth in Household Consumption per Adult equivalent (%)

6

Source: EICV 3; World Bank Staff Calculations, 2014

II. The Drivers and Constraints to Aggregate Growth
11.
The strong growth in household consumption and poverty reduction was led by strong
aggregate growth. Between 2006 and 2013, annual average GDP growth rate reached 7.2 percent, the
highest in EAC countries. A highly strategic approach to development, which has galvanized domestic
and external resources around nationally defined medium- and long-term goals, has delivered economic
growth. GDP per capita22 however remains low (US$620 in 2012, among the bottom 10 percent countries
in the world) although it almost doubled from US$320 in 2006. Despite high growth, economy’s
structure did not change significantly. The public sector plays a critical role (e.g. the public sector
accounted for more than half of the total investment), the non-tradable sectors are dominant, and
investment other than construction is limited. It is time to focus on the challenging second-generation
reforms of export diversification, structural transformation, regional integration, and financial sector
deepening through an increased role of the private sector.
A. Drivers of growth
12.
Growth in Rwanda has been driven by the non-tradable sector while the contribution from
the tradable sector (export crops, manufacturing, and mining) has been limited (Annex Figure 9-A).
This is reflected in the high-service sector contribution (54 percent) to the overall growth followed by
agriculture (21 percent) and industry (18 percent) as well as in growth decomposition by expenditure
items. (Annex Figure 9-B). While consumption was the main driver of the growth, investment (especially
non-construction) had a limited contribution (Annex Figure 9-C). Prudent macroeconomic management
and resulting macroeconomic stability (e.g., low and stable inflation rates between 2010 and 2013) have
been an important factor supporting high growth. For example, the authorities successfully contained the
impacts of the 2008/09 global financial crisis and the 2012 aid decline through monetary and fiscal policy
reactions. Despite authorities’ prompt and adequate repose to the aid decline, growth decelerated to 4.6
percent in 2013 due to the lagged effect of the aid shock.

22

Current US$ calculated based on the Atlas method.

52

Annex Figure 9: Contributions to Growth in 2006-13
A. By Tradable vs. Non-Tradable Sectors

B. By Sectors

4%
21%
Agriculture

Tradable Sector

44%

Industry
Public Services

Non-Tradable Sector
18%

96%

Private Services

10%

C. By Expenditure Items
150%

130%

Imports
45%

110%
90%
70%

7%
30%

50%
30%
10%

Exports
Investment (Capital
Goods)

51%

Investment (Construction)

13%

Private Consumption

-45%

Government
Consumption

-10%
-30%
-50%

Source: NISR, World Bank Staff Calculations , 2014

13.
Foreign aid and effective use of it have played a critical role in growth and macroeconomic
stability.23 Net official development assistance (ODA) as a share of GDP remained high at 20 percent in
2011 or 93 percent of gross fixed capital formation, though it declined from over 150 percent in the early
2000s. Aid flows into Rwanda have been redistributed through public expenditures. In the past decade,
foreign aid (accounting for 30-40 percent of the budget) has supplemented low domestic tax collections
and created fiscal space. While the direct impact of public expenditures has been relatively small (public
service contributed 10 percent to the increase in GDP between 2006 and 2013 as illustrated in Figure 10),
public expenditures stimulated private services such as trade and real estate. Foreign exchange inflows
through aid have also financed the negative current account balance (excluding official transfers) and
made the overall balance of payments positive in the past decade.
14.
Though growth was high, it has not stimulated a significant transformation of the economy.
Between 2006 and 2013, the sectoral composition of the economy changed only marginally. The
economy is led by services (45 percent) followed by agriculture (33 percent). 24 While the share of
industry somewhat increased due to construction (15 percent), manufacturing remains low at 5 percent
(Annex Figure 10). In the expenditure account, while the share of investment increased from 16 percent in
2006 to 25 percent in 2013, this was mainly due to investment in construction while investment in capital
goods increased only marginally (Annex Figure 11) and public investment financed by foreign aid
accounted for more than 50 percent of the total investment. On exports, while the share of exports

23

Rwanda’s performance on aid effectiveness is the best among 77 participating countries in Yoichiro Ishihara, “Identifying Aid
Effectiveness Challenges in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States” (World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.6037, 2012).
24
More than 60 percent of poor households had an income-earning activity outside of agriculture in 2011. This seems to be
reflected in the increase in the share of services.

53

increased to 17 percent in 2013, there has been little progress on export diversification. The share of
traditional products (coffee, tea, and minerals) accounted for almost 60 percent in 2013.
Annex Figure 10: Growth Accounting Exercise
12%

Annex Figure 11: Sectoral Economic Structure
100%
90%

10%

80%

70%

8%

6%
4%

TFP

60%

Labor

50%

Human Capital

40%

Physical Capital

45%

Services
Manufacturing

7%
7%

5%
10%

30%
20%

2%

42%

Industry (w/o
Manufacturing)
Agriculture

38%

33%

2006

2013

10%
0%

0%

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Source: World Bank Staff Calculations , 2014

Source: NISR, World Bank Staff Calculations , 2014

15.
Rwanda’s growth accounting exercise measures the contributions of different factors such as
capital stock, labor, quality of labor (measured by average year of schooling) and total factor
productivity (TFP). The exercise shows that physical capital and total factor productivity were the main
drivers of growth. Although the investment rate as a share of GDP remains low, stocks of physical capital
have accumulated from a low base (Annex Figure 12).
Annex Figure 12: Economic Structure by Expenditures
140%
120%
100%

11%
4%
12%

17%
7%
18%

80%

Imports
Exports

60%
40%

98%

90%

20%

Investment (Capital
Goods)
Investment (Construction)

0%

-20%

-25%

-31%

2006

2013

Consumption

-40%

Source: NISR, World Bank Staff Calculations , 2014

B. Constraints to accelerated and sustained growth
16.
Rwanda’s medium-term development goals require growth to be even higher than it was in
the past. The Vision 2020 goals include GDP per capita of US$1,240, poverty rate below 20 percent, and
urbanization rate of 35 percent by 2020. To achieve these goals, the EDPRS 2 envisages an annual GDP
growth rate of 10.2 percent, which presents an ambitious leap from historic performance. However, the
growth pattern of the past decade (stimulating domestic demand through large aid inflows and effective
use of it) is unlikely to be replicated in the future. Given a possible decline in the share of aid in the
economy in coming years, roles of public expenditures are expected to shift from driving growth to
catalyzing it. The 2012 aid decline and resulting economic slowdown in 2013 have demonstrated the
negative impacts of aid fluctuation.

54

17.
A growth potential estimate suggests that Rwanda will sustain a high growth rate (7-8
percent) in the medium term (Annex Figure 13.25 This estimate assumes more than 3 percent of growth
comes from contribution from physical stocks (i.e., increase in investment is required) together with
maintaining high total factor productivity.
Annex Figure 13: Potential Growth Rate (2014-20)
9.0%
8.0%
7.0%
6.0%

TFP

5.0%

Labor

4.0%

Human Capital

3.0%

Physical Capital

2.0%

1.0%
0.0%
2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Source: World Bank Staff Calculations , 2014

18.
In order to achieve accelerated and sustainable growth, it is imperative to transform the
drivers of growth from the public to the private sector by removing key constraints to private
investment. At the same time, for the public sector to play a catalytic role in achieving private sector-led
growth, it is important to mobilize domestic resources to create fiscal space and prioritize expenditures
through improved public financial management (PFM). Fast growing, non-resource-rich countries
typically have sustained investment rates of 25 percent of GDP or higher and bulk of it comes from the
private sector. In contrast, more than half of Rwanda’s investment (at 24 percent of GDP) is from the
public sector financed by foreign aid. Foreign aid accounts for 30-40 percent of the budget as the tax to
GDP ratio remains at 14 percent of GDP (much lower than Sub-Saharan Africa’s average at 25 percent).
Since foreign aid as a share of GDP is likely to decline in the medium term, it is essential to accelerate
domestic resource mobilization.
19.

Several factors have constrained private investment in Rwanda, including:


Small financial sector. Access and cost of borrowing money is one of top constraints to
conducive business climate.26 This reflects small financial sector in Rwanda. For example, the
number of borrowers from commercial banks is much lower than other EAC countries.



Weak infrastructure, particularly electricity. Firms in Rwanda pay the highest electricity costs in
the region at US$0.24 per kilowatt-hour (kWh) compared to US$0.15 per kWh in Kenya, and
US$0.17 per kWh in Uganda; businesses experience on average 10 power outages per month.
Availability and cost of electricity is ranked as the third most serious problem facing Rwanda.27
And as Rwanda is a land-locked country, the limited transport infrastructure makes transport of
goods very expensive; it is more expensive to bring goods from Dar es Salaam to Kigali than
from Europe to Dar es Salaam. The lack of adequate electricity supply and transport routes is a
major barrier to investment in manufacturing capacities.

25

World Bank. 2014. Rwanda Economic Update 5: Seizing Opportunities for Growth, with a Special Focus on Harnessing the
Demographic Dividend.
26
For example, Rwanda Prosperity Ecosystem Survey: Evaluating Rwanda’s Business and Investment Climate 2013.
27
Rwanda prosperity ecosystem survey: evaluating Rwanda’s Business and Investment Climate, Private Sector Federation
business survey, 2013.

55



Low human capital and qualified workers. As the services sector has been expanding faster than
education enrolment, skills have become a binding constraint to growth. Business surveys show
that firms are finding it increasingly difficult to hire workers with the right skills and often hire
foreign-skilled labor. At the same time, the share of the working-age population is increasing; but
taking advantage of this ‘demographic dividend’ only works if accompanied by an increase in
skills, particularly for new market entrants and youth. Enhancing human capital requires
improving the quantity (enrolment) and quality of education, but also of health services since
labor productivity is directly tied to health outcomes.

20.
While removing the obstacles to private sector development is imperative, there is also scope
to stimulate the economy through improving the effective and efficient use of public resources, increasing
agriculture/non-agriculture productivity, and leveraging urbanization.


Improving PFM. Mobilizing domestic resources through tax policy and administration reforms
from the low base at 14 percent of GDP in FY2012/13 will secure fiscal space for public
expenditures in general and public investment in particular. Building on the progress to date,
domestic resource mobilization should be accompanied by other elements of public financial
management such as a tighter link between planning and budget and improved public investment
management. Furthermore, given the disparity of access to public services across the districts,
public expenditures should be allocated so that they adjust the disparity.



Productivity gains in the agriculture sector. Smallholder farms and reliance on rain-fed
production characterize agriculture in Rwanda, which accounts for one-third of GDP and 70
percent of employment. Small farms face challenges accessing input and output markets owing to
weak rural infrastructure and low use of irrigation as well as limited market information. Various
policy actions could raise productivity in the sector, including legislative reform, investment in
rural infrastructure, and land administration reform.



Productivity gains in the non-agriculture sector. Despite its performance demonstrated in the
Doing Business indicators, private non-farm sectors show evidence of various bottlenecks to
productivity growth and investment. Business surveys point to numerous layers of bureaucracy of
the public sector and weak coordination between public institutions, which is particularly
affecting foreign investors’ decision to invest in Rwanda. Two areas of the business environment
that particularly stand out are land acquisition and tax payment. Investors report long delays
caused by the public sector in acquiring land. In addition, the transparency of the tax system
seems to be weak with numerous taxes and payments required from both the central and district
governments.



Leveraging urbanization. The continued population growth and high population density (highest
in Africa) provides a strong rational for Rwanda to leverage urbanization for economic growth
and poverty reduction. If managed well, urbanization would result in productivity enhancements
in the non-farm economy owing to the agglomeration effects of demand for consumption and
labor supply. In parallel, a reduction in the rural population would yield productivity
enhancements in farming as well given the labor surplus and high rates of underemployment that
currently characterize the agricultural sector.
III. Drivers of Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity

21.
Agriculture has been the main driver of household consumption growth and poverty
reduction in Rwanda over the past decade28. Consistent with strong public investments in agriculture,
particularly since 2007/8, aggregate agricultural output almost doubled between 2000 and 2011 (Annex
28

World Bank. 2013. Rwanda Economic Update 4: Maintaining Momentum, with a special focus on Rwanda’s pathway out of
poverty.

56

Agricultural production index
(2000=100)

Figure 14. The increase in production accounted for 35 percent of the total reduction in poverty between
2001 and 2011. Increased commercialization of agriculture, as witnessed by the rising share of harvests
sold on local markets, explains another 10 percent. The improvements in agriculture have greatly
impacted the main income source of the poor: Poor households’ income from agriculture almost doubled
between 2006 and 201129. Taken together, the improvements in agriculture accounted for close to half (45
percent) of the total reduction in poverty between 2001 and 2011.
Annex Figure 14: Agricultural output doubled since 2000
210
180
150
120
90
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Source: FAOSTAT, 2014

22.
Rapid diversification into non-farm activities has been the second main driver of poverty
reduction. While only 20 percent of poor households had an income-earning activity outside of
agriculture in 2001, this had increased to more than 60 percent by 2011. This evolution has been
particularly salient for self-employment in small non-farm businesses, the so-called household
enterprises. The diversification into non-farm activities has reduced income risk, as poor households no
longer uniquely depend on agriculture, and hence on the vagaries of unpredictable weather patterns, to
generate income. The diversification into non-farm self-employment emerges as the second main driver
of poverty reduction, explaining 13 percent of the total reduction over the past decade (Annex Figure 15).
The progressive uptake of non-farm wage employment has been important for poverty reduction in Kigali
but has been of only marginal importance on the national level given Kigali’s small contribution to
overall poverty.

29

NISR. 2012. EICV3 Thematic Report: Income. National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.

57

Annex Figure 15: Agriculture Accounted for the Bulk of National Poverty Reduction
(Contribution of the Various Factors to Poverty Reduction between 2001 and 2011, percent)
Other Factors and
Unexplained Part
30%

Increased
Agricultural
Production
35%

Non-Farm Wage
Employment
3%

Non-Farm Self
Employment
13%

Decreased
Dependency Ratio
9%

Increased
Agricultural
Commercialization
10%

Source: EICV1 and EICV3 and World Bank calculations

23.
Favorable demographics gave an extra boost to poverty reduction. The total fertility rate (the
average number of children a woman can expect to have at the end of the reproductive period) dropped
from 5.8 in 2000 to 4.6 in 2010. This drop in fertility led to a decrease in average household size and in
the youth dependency ratio (the number of economically dependent children per working-age adult in the
household). The drop in the youth dependency ratio, from 1.0 in 2001 to 0.9 in 2011, increased household
disposable income and accounted for 9 percent of the reduction in poverty.
24.
The drop in fertility holds a longer-term promise as well. As a result of the sharp decline in
fertility, the share of the labor force in the total population is projected to increase substantially over the
coming decades (from 53 percent in 2010 to 64-67 percent by 2050). Combined with a declining youth
dependency ratio, the rapidly growing labor force has the potential to significantly boost output and
growth.30 Reaping this demographic dividend will however require strong job creation to accommodate
the burgeoning labor force.
IV. Sustainability of Growth and Poverty Reduction
25.
For sustainability, Rwanda’s model for economic development demands an
environmentally friendly approach. Substantial parts of Rwanda’s economy, in particular its agriculture
and mining sectors, have direct impact on the environment. Hence, the country will face trade-offs in
developing these sectors, and improved management of environmental and natural resources will be
needed in order to support sustained growth. Input requirements (water, energy, land, raw materials) will
need to keep pace with projected rapid growth, while minimizing negative environmental externalities.
The Government takes environmental challenges seriously. A study is underway to explore some of the
“big picture” trade-offs that might occur between the pursuit of rapid growth and the imperative for
environmental sustainability over coming years.
26.
There are several risks to the sustainability of growth and poverty reduction, both internal
and external ones. The main internal risks arise from variable climatic conditions and the private sector
response to government reforms. Agriculture is the main employer and driver of poverty reduction but
30

World Bank. 2014. Rwanda Economic Update 5: Seizing Opportunities for Growth, with a Special Focus on Harnessing the
Demographic Dividend.

58

remains vulnerable to the vicissitudes of unpredictable weather patterns and regional droughts and floods,
which can significantly affect output and progress on poverty reduction. Favorable weather conditions
will be a sine qua non for attainment of the EDPRS 2 targets. The important role given to the private
sector in the EDPRS 2 is challenging given the modest performance of the private sector over the past
years. In case the private sector does not respond well to reforms, the ambitious targets elaborated in the
EDPRS 2 would be adversely affected.
27.
The main external risks to sustainability relate to a more-rapid-than-expected tapering of
donor inflows, the pace of regional integration and the potential for regional conflict, and a
prolonged slump in the global economy. As a landlocked country, Rwanda is crucially dependent on
closer integration with its neighbors to facilitate imports and exports and drive economic growth. While
progress on regional integration could drive economic growth across the region and boost regional
stability, renewed tensions and conflict could stall integration, adversely affecting Rwanda’s plans to
become a regional hub, as well as donor flows with adverse implications for growth. Rwanda’s high
reliance on foreign aid makes its development strategy vulnerable to the uncertainty of donor flows.
While Rwanda is fairly insulated from the global economy, a prolonged slump would nevertheless have a
negative impact on growth prospects through lower demand for goods and services and more constrained
availability of external financing.
V. Priority Areas for Rwanda
28
Accelerating the rates of growth and poverty reduction from their already high levels will
require a significant restructuring of the economy. Achieving private sector-led growth will require
addressing constraints to a more conducive business climate by removing key bottlenecks in energy and
infrastructure. Sustaining or even accelerating the rate of poverty reduction will require continued growth
in agricultural productivity and an extensive and effective social protection system to support the incomes
of the poorest and most vulnerable.
29
Several priorities for mid-term sustained growth and poverty reduction in Rwanda
emerged from undertaking the analysis for this diagnostic and the CPS consultations with
stakeholders. In addition to addressing constraints to a more conducive business climate, other areas of
priority are effective/efficient use of public resources together with domestic resource mobilization,
investing in human capital, instituting well-managed urbanization, achieving accountable governance
through enhanced PFM and more effective decentralization to ensure greater equality in public service
delivery, and continuing investments in agriculture and social protection
A. Energy and transport
30
Turning the private sector into the driver of growth will require a substantial reduction in
the costs of energy and transport. The current high costs of energy and transport undermine the
competitiveness of Rwandan firms and Rwanda’s attractiveness as a destination for foreign direct
investment, constraining growth, and job creation. The need for significant enterprise development is
particularly important given the rapidly increasing labor force: an estimated 200,000 people will join the
labor force each year over the EDPRS 2 period, which is almost double the rate of job creation in the past.
A vibrant private sector will be needed to absorb this burgeoning labor force.
B. Agriculture, rural development and social protection
Agriculture has been the main engine of poverty reduction in the past and is likely to
remain so in the near term. The main Government programs in agriculture currently do not even cover
half of arable land, and productivity remains below the average of Sub-Saharan Africa. Irrigation and
fertilizer use are still low despite recent gains; and increased agricultural mechanization, currently at 12
31

59

percent, could result in strong productivity bumps. Addressing these issues while also building
appropriate rural infrastructure (feeder roads, markets, post-harvest storage facilities) and specialized
agricultural skills have the potential to significantly increase productivity and agricultural incomes and,
hence, result in sustained rapid poverty reduction.
32
While improvements in agriculture and rural infrastructure will go a long way in increasing
the incomes of the poor, they are unlikely to reach most destitute households. The poorest households
are often landless or have landholdings that are grossly insufficient to provide for even their most basic
food needs, which means improvements in agriculture will largely bypass them. These households either
need direct support to their incomes or the opportunity to participate in wage employment in public
infrastructure projects. The government’s flagship social protection program (Vision 2020 Umurenge
Program) currently covers half of the country’s 416 sectors, and a targeted and evidence-based scale-up
could result in more poverty reduction and continued pro-poor growth.
C. Urbanization
33
The high and increasing pressure on land and the need to create substantial off-farm
employment offer strong incentives for urbanization. Well-managed urbanization could be an
important catalyst for accelerated growth, improved service delivery, and non-farm job creation. Research
shows urbanization is associated with higher economic growth rates and creation of nonfarm jobs, which
Rwanda will sorely need in light of increasing pressure on arable land. In addition, urbanization to
secondary towns (as opposed to urbanization to the capital), a key element of the Government’s strategy
on urbanization, is linked to accelerated poverty reduction.31 Urbanization is also associated with lower
fertility levels and high levels of investments in children’s health and education, which are all conducive
to nurturing a productive future labor force.
D. Decentralization and PFM
34
Despite strong improvements in delivery of basic services, there remains a large inequality
in service delivery across districts. Access to basic health facilities (health centers) varies from 32
percent of the population in certain districts to almost 100 percent in other districts. Similarly, while in
certain districts nearly everyone has access to the local administration (sector administration), this drops
to a mere six percent for other districts. Decentralization, if done well, can provide a stronger match
between services delivered at local levels and services actually needed, and hence benefit local
populations in terms of quality of service delivery and improved living standards. This should be
supported by improvements in PFM, both at the national and subnational level, to optimize allocation of
scarce resources to sub-nationally identified priority areas.
E. Education and skills
35
Formal education and skills levels in Rwanda are low. The median level of education of the
labor force amounts to the fourth grade of primary school, and over 16 percent of the labor force have
never been to school. The situation is however improving for the younger generations: net enrolment in
primary school stands at 92 percent while gross enrolment in secondary school more than doubled in only
five years (41 percent in 2011 up from 20 percent in 2006). Despite these positive evolutions, the
Rwandan labor force is projected to remain relatively low-skilled over the foreseeable future.32

31

Luc Christiaensen, Joachim De Weerdt, and Yasuyuki Todo, Urbanization and Poverty Reduction, The Role of Rural
Diversification and Secondary Towns (Policy Research Working Paper 6422, World Bank, April 2013).
32
It is estimated that approximately 20 percent of the labor force will have secondary education by 2020. The mean years of
schooling is projected to be 5.6 (World Bank EdStats projections).

60

36
Rwanda cannot afford to wait for the current generation of children to complete their
schooling and enter the labor market. The skills of the current labor force need to be improved to allow
workers to increase their productivity and facilitate the move from subsistence agriculture toward a
higher-value, market-oriented mode of production or into higher-productivity, non-farm occupations. This
could consist of basic skills training for farm workers in functional and financial literacy, specialized
agricultural skills, and targeted vocational training to build basic skills for employment in labor-intensive
subsectors (construction, transport, light manufacturing).
F. Child health and nutrition
Despite recent improvements, the rate of chronic malnutrition in Rwanda remains high.
Forty-four percent of children under five years of age are stunted, down from 51 percent in 2005; and
almost one in five suffers from severe chronic malnutrition. Stunting in early childhood has consequences
that last for a lifetime. Poor nutrition in early childhood is causally linked to increased mortality, disease
and disability, worse educational outcomes, and lower productivity and income as adults. The first 1,000
days of a child last forever; consequently, the high incidence of malnutrition in Rwanda’s human capital
risks jeopardizing the health and well-being of it future citizens as well as its future labor force, with
negative implications for productivity and economic growth.
37

Data on malnutrition shows that poverty is not the only culprit. While poor children are more
at risk, 25 percent of children in the richest 20 percent of households are stunted. Similarly, some of the
poorest districts in Rwanda have the lowest rates of chronic malnutrition. This highlights the need for
improved nutrition education on appropriate feeding and care practices.
38

61

Annex 4: Rwanda and the MDGs
Poverty has significantly declined in Rwanda over the past decade, but challenges remain. While
the poverty headcount (the proportion of the population living below the national poverty line) decreased
by 14 percentage points between 2001 and 2011, 45% of the population lives below the poverty line.33
Therefore, despite the drop in poverty, Rwanda is unlikely to achieve the 2015 MDG-1 target for poverty
and hunger eradication (Table 3)34. The poverty headcount is much higher in rural areas (49%) than
urban areas (22%). Extreme poverty (the fraction of the population living below the food poverty line)
dropped by 16 percentage points over the past decade, but 24% of the population was still in extreme
poverty in 2011. Inequality slightly improved, reflected in a Gini coefficient of 0.49 in 2011 compared to
0.52 in 2006. The decline in poverty occurred during a period of high growth rates in Rwanda but also
during intermittent periods of food price inflation.
While notable progress has been made in a wide range of health and primary education indicators,
children malnutrition and stunting remains a very serious health problem (Annex Table 12). The
2009 Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA) and Nutrition Survey showed
that Rwanda has made progress in terms of increasing food security but indicated that more investments
are needed to sustain this progress. It is notable that the observed decline in poverty between 2006 and
2011 was accompanied by a decline in the proportion of female-headed households among the poorest
income quintiles. This appears to show that female-headed households are becoming less vulnerable,
which corroborates the excellent performance of Rwanda with regard to the achievement of MDG-3 on
gender equality.35 With regard to MDG-7 on environmental sustainability, Rwanda’s natural resources are
under pressure from the growing population, which is most evident in land degradation, soil erosion,
declines in soil fertility, deforestation, wetland degradation, and a loss of biodiversity. Further economic
development will increase environmental pressures by increasing energy consumption, pollution, and
urbanization. Progress in increasing the proportion of the population that has access to safe drinking water
and improved sanitation facilities is still too slow to reach the set targets.
The 2010 Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) and the EICV3 have shown that
maternal and child health has improved dramatically, and HIV prevalence has been contained at
3% since 2005. Under-five mortality decreased more than threefold since the early 2000s, hitting the
mark of a two-thirds reduction in child mortality targeted by MDG 4. Progress in health indicators was
mainly sustained by increased access to health care, largely due to the increased proximity of health
centers to residential areas. However, more progress still needs to be made with respect to nutrition.
Nationwide, 44% of children under the age of 5 are stunted, and 17% are severely stunted. In regard to
education, Rwanda has made progress in expanding access, with net primary school enrollment having
increased from 76% in 2001 to 99% in 2011. Also, the primary school completion rate increased from
24% in 2001 to 79% in 2011. If this progress continues, there is a possibility of the related MDG target
being achieved by 2015. However, indicators for secondary and tertiary education are still lagging behind
and there is a challenge to improve the quality of teaching, for example the primary school pupil to
qualified teacher ratio stood at 62:1 in 2011/12.36
33

NISR (2012), The Third Integrated household Living Conditions Survey (EICV3) available at
http://statistics.gov.rw/images/PDF/Main%20EICV3%20report.pdf
34
The 2010 MDG country report set the goals to be met by 2015 in accordance with national priorities and through the
implementation of the EDPRS.
35
Within education, gender parity in literacy rates and gender enrollment parity at the primary level have been achieved. Within
the public arena, the number of woman in politics, parliament, and all decision-making bodies has sharply increased over the last
decade, supported by the government’s target of 30% female representation. For example, to date, women hold 56% of the seats
in Rwanda's Parliament, the highest percentage of female lawmakers in the world.
36
USAID Task Order 7 Early Grade Reading and Mathematics in Rwanda, February 2012 indicated that many pupils were not
receiving adequate instruction in the important skills needed to read and interpret text. The complexity of this effort is increased
by the change in 2008 from French to English as the medium of instruction.

62

Annex Table 12: Progress against MDGs
Goals

Indicators

2000

2005

2008

Latest
data

2015
Target

Goal 1a: Eradicate extreme
poverty and hunger: Reduce by
half the proportion of people
living on less than a dollar a day

Proportion of population below
the national poverty line

58.9

56.7

--

44.9
(2011)

23.8

20.3

18.0

15.8

11.4
(2010)

14.5

--

--

--

24.1
(2011)

17

--

84.0

94.2

--

49.2

74.5

96.0

100.2

--

Seats occupied by females in
Parliament (%)

17.0

48.8

56.3

56.3
(2011)

50

Mortality rate, under-5 (per
1,000)

196.0

152.0

103.0

54
(2012)

47

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000
live births)

107.0

86.0

62.0

38
(2012)

28

1071.0

720.0

540.0

476
(2012)

325

31.3

38.6

52.1

69
(2010)

90

3.8

3.1

--

3 (2010)

n/a

13.9

15.6

--

67.0

66.0

65.0

40.0

49.0

54.0

Goal 1b: Eradicate extreme
hunger: Reduce by half the
proportion of people who suffer
from hunger
Goal 2: Universal primary
education: Ensure that all boys
and girls complete a full course
of primary schooling
Goal 3: Promote gender
equality and empower women:
Eliminate gender disparity in
primary
and
secondary
education preferably by 2005
and at all levels by 2015
Goal
4:
Reduce
child
mortality: Reduce by two-thirds
the mortality rate among
children under 5 between 1990
and 2015
Goal 5: Improve maternal
health: Reduce by threequarters the maternal mortality
ratio
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS,
malaria, and other diseases: a)
Halt and begin to reverse the
spread of HIV/AIDS and b) halt
and begin to reverse the
incidence of malaria and other
major diseases
Goal 7: Ensure environmental
sustainability: a) Integrate the
principles
of
sustainable
development
into
country
policies and programs and b)
reverse loss of environmental
resources.

Prevalence of underweight
children under 5 years old (%)
Proportion of the population
below minimum level of dietary
energy (%)
Net enrollment ratio in primary
education
Primary completion rate, total
(% of relevant age group)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary
and secondary education (%)

Maternal
mortality
ratio
(modeled estimate, per 100,000
live births)
Births attended by skilled
personnel (% of births)

HIV prevalence

Proportion of land covered by
forest (%)
Improved water source (% of
population with access)
Improved sanitation facilities (%
of population with access)

98.7
(2010/11)
79
(2010/11)
101.1
(2008)

17.6
(2010)
74.2
(2011)
74.5
(2011)

100
100
n/a

25
82
n/a

Sources: Millennium Development Goals Progress Report, Rwanda Country Report 2010, DHS2010, EICV3, WDI,
CPAF Matrix

Access to basic services has increased significantly among poor rural households. In Rwanda, 98% of
the poor live in rural areas. Between 2006 and 2011, access to public primary education among the rural
poor increased from 68% to 75%, and access to health centers from 63% to 81% (Annex Table 13). It is
worth noting that these improvements have taken place during the same period in which decentralization
was accelerated.

63

Important challenges remain to deliver basic
services to the poorest citizens (Annex Table 14).
Electrification, for example, has mostly benefitted
the wealthiest households. While the proportion of
wealthy families with access to electricity rose from
18% in 2006 to 39% in 2011, about 1% of
households in the first two quintiles of the income
distribution (the poorest 40%) have access to
electricity. On the other hand, other services,
education, health, and water and sanitation, have
shown more income-neutral or even pro-poor
increases in access. Access to improved sanitation, in
particular, has increased by more than 50% among
the poorest 20% compared to 12% among the richer
20%. Access to safe drinking water has also
increased at a (slightly) faster rate among the poor
while health insurance has increased by almost 60%
in all consumption quintiles, with a slightly more
pronounced increase for women (from 44% to 70%).

Annex Table 13: Access to Services by Poor
Household in Rural Areas (%)
Use
Satisfaction rate
2006 2011 2006
2011
Public Primary
67.5 74.7 61.7
74.8
Education
Health Centre
63.1 80.6 74.1
84.7
District Office
35.8
55
68.6
74.8
Source: NISR
Annex Table 14: Households’ Access to Services
(%)
Access to
Services

Electricity

Safe Drinking
Water

Improved
Sanitation

Health
Insurance

2005/06 2010/11 2005/06 2010/11 2005/06 2010/11 2005/06 2010/11

Rwanda

4.3

10.8

70.3

74.2

58.5

74.5

43.3

68.8

Q1

0.0

0.4

66.6

68.4

42.4

64.7

33.2

52.9

Q2

0.2

0.8

66.7

71.4

51.1

72.1

37.6

61.4

Q3

0.1

2.1

67.2

71.5

55.6

71.9

45.5

69.3

Q4
0.6
5.6
68.9
73.2
60.9
74.7
47.7
74.5
Similarly, there is great inequality to access to
services across Districts. For example, usage of
Q5
17.8
38.8
79.6
84.0
76.6
85.6
51.5
84.5
sector administration provided by sub-district
Source: NISR
varies from 6% in Rusizi District to 98% in
Nyabihu District. Large differences across districts are also observed in access to health services
(e.g. health centers and district hospitals). The large inequality across districts reiterates the
importance of bringing the state closer to citizens.

64

Annex 5: Counting Rwanda: the state of statistics and data
The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) was established in 2005. Since its inception, NISR
implemented two Integrated Household Living Conditions Surveys (EICV), two Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS) and one interim-DHS, two Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability and Nutrition
Analysis Surveys, one Population and Housing Census, three National Agricultural Surveys and many
smaller surveys covering specific topics. Besides that the institute also produces on a regular basis the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) and a host of other routine economic statistics. Together with Development
Partners, the World Bank is supporting the NISR in its rapid development through its contribution to the
basket fund for the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics.


Core Statistics: NISR produces core economic statistics (national accounts and CPI) on a regular and
timely basis. The CPI is published each month on NISR’s website. National accounts are on quarterly
basis and published on NISR’s website by the 15th of the last month of the subsequent quarter. Trade
and monetary statistics are produced on monthly basis by the National Bank of Rwanda (BNR).
Monetary statistics are regularly published on BNR’s website while trade statistics are available upon
the request. Fiscal data are produced on quarterly basis by the ministry of finance (MINECOFIN).
Since 2012, they are unregularly published on MINECOFIN’s website



Quality, coverage and frequency of key data: NISR has been remarkably constant in the production
of key data. Censuses are implemented every 10 years (last one in 2012) and every five years there
has been a large socioeconomic household survey (EICV) with data on poverty (2001, 2006 and
2011). The next poverty survey is scheduled for 2013/14. DHS surveys were implemented in 2000,
2005 and 2010, with an interim one in 2008. The next DHS is planned for 2014/15.



Administrative data: Most line ministries have a Management Information System to keep track of
important data in their sectors. Administrative data systems are largely uncoordinated and quality is
believed to vary substantially across ministries. An assessment conducted by NISR in the framework
of the elaboration of the second National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (2014-2018)
revealed that most administrative records require strengthening. The Open Data Readiness
Assessment conducted in June 2013 also identified problems of sharing of administrative data
between ministries, with lengthy ad hoc procedures to obtain data from other ministries.



Data access: NISR has made solid progress in recent years in establishing a National Data Archive
(NaDa) and designing an interactive open data portal. Microdata from all recent household surveys
can be downloaded from the NISR website through NaDa after registration. In June 2013, the
Government of Rwanda and the WB conducted an Open Data Readiness Assessment (ODRA) to
evaluate the feasibility and willingness to put all non-confidential government data (statistical and
administrative) in the public domain through an open data portal. The findings and recommendations
of the ODRA were largely adopted and the government is in the process of drafting an Open Data
policy.



Capacity and reliance on external consultants: Although a dynamic and ambitious institute, NISR
lacks the capacity to independently fulfill its mission. A recent capacity assessment showed only 14
percent of NISR professional staff has a Master’s degree and not a single one has a PhD. The bulk of
staff (81 percent) has Bachelor’s degrees. NISR depends on external international consultancy firms
for the implementation of key surveys and the analysis of complex survey and census data, which
substantially pushes up survey costs. Although this leads to quality data in the short-run, it begs the
question of long-run sustainability. Note however that NISR is currently implementing a five-year
capacity building program.



The World Bank’s contribution to statistics in Rwanda: The WB has been supporting the
statistics agenda in Rwanda since 2012 through the Statistics for Results Facility (SRF). The SRF
funding, amounting to US$ 10 million, is part of a Basket Fund for the National Strategy for the

65

Development of Statistics (2010-2014) together with DfID and the European Union. Through the
basket fund, the WB has supported data production, data dissemination and capacity building. The
SRF project has recently been restructured to address some start-up difficulties and to include
additional activities in the framework of NSDS 2 preparation. The closing date has also been
extended to June 30th, 2015. A recent independent evaluation of the SRF in Rwanda revealed
stakeholders’ belief that SRF has played a significant role in giving statistics a more powerful and
relevant role in economic and social management in Rwanda both in terms of technical support and
finance.

66

Annex 6: Environmental Review of Challenges and Opportunities for Rwanda to Grow
Sustainability
A rapid assessment of environmental and natural resource issues was conducted, focused on the key
areas of Bank assistance to Rwanda’s development strategy. This review showed several important
issues and areas of potential trade-offs, where improved management of environmental and natural
resource issues can be built into ongoing investments in the agriculture, energy, urban and SME sectors.
To support sustained growth, attention will be needed to ensure that priority sector input requirements
(water, energy, land, raw materials) can keep pace with projected rapid growth, while minimizing
negative environmental externalities. In agriculture, Government plans call for rapid and large
improvements in productivity and some shifting to higher value crops and value added processing. With
limited land, expansion or intensification toward one crop or subsector may mean less area available for
traditional or food crops. Trade-offs in land use will need to be carefully managed. Rapid expansion in
some subsectors (e.g., horticulture or tree crops for export) may require more fertilizer or pesticides or
improved practices to assure that expansion or intensification do not exacerbate erosion or contamination
of water supplies. Water and energy demand balancing and trade-offs will also be important to consider in
the context of the Government’s strong interest to develop the minerals sector, which is growing rapidly
from a currently low base. Transport, logistics and investment climate improvements may make some
kinds of deposits more economically viable. The Government will need the capacity to negotiate and
monitor mining sector transactions and to ensure that natural capital exploitation is transformed into
produced and human capital as an investment in future growth. As urbanization accelerates in Rwanda’s
effort to promote six new urban centers, it will be important to ensure that water and air pollution and
solid waste are properly managed.
Rwanda’s environmental legislation is decent, but there may be a need to strengthen capacity to
implement, including timely review of investment proposals to ensure that good environmental
regulations do not become a bottleneck to investment and growth. Decentralized municipal
governments will also need the capacity and resources to manage these issues, and the associated spatial
planning that will create more livable urban environments. Rapidly growing energy demand can be met
partially through increased reliance on renewable resources, but special attention will be needed to
monitor the demand and supply of fuel wood and charcoal to ensure that sustainably grown timber is
available to meet these needs and that growth does not accelerate encroachment into the protected areas
that harbor Rwanda’s natural heritage and biodiversity, which sustain the tourism economy. Climate
change will pose a new threat to Rwanda, particularly the need to build resilience into plans for
development in the agriculture, energy and urban sectors.
Environment and natural resource issues also offer some interesting opportunities for Rwanda to
apply ICT and create new jobs in environmental monitoring and management, especially in the
newly urbanizing areas and in the rural areas. There are also potential wins by incorporating green
spaces in Rwanda’s spatial planning and urban planning initiatives, using greener materials and
approaches in housing and infrastructure development and including innovative energy generation and
management (recycling, landfills and biogas generations) in urban planning. The table below details
some of the challenges and opportunities summarized here.

67

Agriculture and Land
Urban

Environmental/NR Challenges & Opportunities in the Bank’s Assistance to Rwanda
Challenges
Opportunities
Links to WBG Portfolio
 Extreme topography and
 With little room for additional
 Major land husbandry
population density makes land scarce expansion of agricultural frontier,
investments under RSSP and LWH
and subject to high risk of erosion, as Rwanda plans intensification and
projects.
well as land slides and flooding in
increased productivity to contribute to
 LVEMP is carrying out some
some areas. Other areas also
future growth. This will require increased riparian and watershed habilitation
experience drought. All will be
use of modern inputs, changes in
activities.
subject to more variation, less
traditional practices, and better
 LAFREC aims to implement a
predictability under climate change,
management of soil and water resources
forest-friendly restoration program
with the possibility of more frequent
to prevent erosion and water pollution.
in the Gishwati-Mukura landscape,
extreme events.
 Improved land husbandry already
complementing agricultural
 Remaining large natural habitat
recognized as national priority and
investments.
blocks are all within protected areas
benefitting from major programs of
 Opportunities to identify and
and relatively well protected.
investment (mainly in the form of
pursue win-win measures to
Conversion of wetlands has
terracing with associated improvements
enhance SLM elements within new
continued in recent years, but
in composting, agroforestry and
agriculture programs,
classification system has been
protection of drainage lines).
incorporating environment,
introduced to regulate which can be
 Potential opportunities to enhance
watershed and landscape issues.
subject to exploitation. Remaining
SLM under agricultural programs with
 Agriculture investments will
natural wetlands are also affected by
complementary landscape management
benefit from analysis of the cross
agricultural run-off and sediment,
elements including, using watershed and
sectoral energy and water
and related water hyacinth
climate resilience factors in targeting
implications of crop changes and
infestations, which offer some
criteria, improved agroforestry and
value added production processes
potential for biomass energy
woodlots, promotion of low-impact tree
(water for washing, energy for
production.
& estate crops, additional focus on
drying and processing)
 Rapid, large improvements in
drylands in the east, integrated pest and
productivity and shifts to higher
nutrient management, green infrastructure
value crops and value added
for wetland and slope protection.
processing may create land pressures
and trade-offs among competing land
uses, including traditional or food
crops.
 Urban growth will exacerbate
 Rwanda’s effort to direct urban
 LVEMP will assist in collecting
concentrated pollution sources and
develop into six urban core/pole areas
information on point-source
associated health impacts.
offers the chance to manage rapid
pollution sources & loads,
 Sanitation and waste
urbanization and concentrate resources on supporting cleaner production
management provision remains
planning, service delivery and well
activities, and providing some
inadequate.
designed housing and urban infrastructure investments in sanitation planning
 Development on steep lands is
in a few locations.
and facilities.
highly vulnerable to floods and land
 Clean, green cities (including green
 Urban and housing investments
slips.
spaces) have the potential to attract the
can contribute to Rwanda’s spatial
highly mobile knowledge professionals
planning efforts and assess and
required to drive a modern knowledge
adopt Resilient / Green Cities
services economy.
approaches.
 Several urban centers retain wetland
habitats, which offer opportunities to
include green space in urban development
/ spatial plans.

68

Energy
SMEs
X-cutting institutions

Environmental/NR Challenges & Opportunities in the Bank’s Assistance to Rwanda
Challenges
Opportunities
Links to WBG Portfolio
 High reliance on woodfuels and
 Rwanda is developing domestic
 Energy sector investments will
biomass energy has the potential to
renewable (or low impact) energy sources benefit from sound planning,
deplete soils of needed nutrients.
(e.g. methane) which can help to reduce
consideration of cross sectoral
 Imported hydrocarbons in
pressure on biomass fuel sources.
trade-offs (alternative uses of land
current energy mix are a high cost
 Since most natural forests remain in
and water)
alternative.
protected areas, woodfuels are already
 Energy sector improvements
 Fuel wood and charcoal
sourced mostly from plantations, where
could also focus on small scale,
production rely on access to land and efficiency and productivity can be
distributed energy production
planted trees.
improved, which is also potentially an
approaches that improve on
 Hydropower development is an
opportunity for the private sector
resource use efficiency or provide
opportunity that needs to be managed  Opportunities to improve
cleaner alternatives to
properly with respect to downstream
sustainability of hydropower investments wood/biomass fuels, currently in
safety, upstream watershed
through investments in upper watershed
widespread use. LAFREC could
management, and social issues
management, which can contribute also to contribute on improving woodlot
associated with land acquisition.
local livelihoods.
management.
 Energy sector analysis could
focus on the implications of more
rapid growth and urbanization in
terms of the types and locations of
needed energy and the potential for
alternative and renewable
development.
 SMEs may operate below the
 There are attempt to concentrate
 Growth strategy for tourism &
scale at with EIAs are conducted, but industries in industrial parks in Kigali,
horticulture as part of private
cumulative impacts can still be
where impacts can be more readily
sector development project.
significant or widespread (e.g.,
monitored and managed.
 LVEMP will be collecting
engine repair)
 Cleaner production approaches can
information on point-source
 Existing environmental
provide simple but significant win-wins.
pollution sources & loads, and
regulations and monitoring systems
 IT / crowd-sourcing tools to help
supporting cleaner production
may need to be reconsidered to
monitoring and incentivize improved
activities.
ensure appropriate applications to
performance.
 Opportunities to include
SMEs, particularly for high
 Growth potentials in eco-friendly
questions in SME surveys to
polluting/high impact subsectors,
sectors - tourism, tree & estate crops,
identify extent of SMEs with
which could benefit from further
rural energy, IT
significant environmental issues,
study.
coverage of existing regulatory
 Some additional study could be
systems and awareness of /
focused on potential impacts of small
demand for cleaner production,
scale but rapidly growing subsectors
awareness and compliance with
that will accompany modernization
existing regulations.
and urbanization.
 Small country, with limited
 Development of IT infrastructure and  Incorporate environmental
numbers of technical specialists
expertise provides opportunities for
management capacity development
available.
innovative uses in monitoring and crowd- within sector interventions.
 Limited routine environmental
sourcing.
 Consider innovations in ICT
monitoring.
 Build environmental management
that can be effectively incorporated
 Capacity to manage and
and monitoring capacity in the sectors
into existing investment plans at
decentralize environmental
and municipalities where it needs to be
sectoral and urban level.
regulation under rapid growth and
applied and regularly managed, not just in
urbanization may be limited.
central environmental agencies.

69

Annex 7: Donor Coordination
The Government of Rwanda takes a firm approach to managing development assistance with a
view to maximizing the impact of aid on strategic development targets. With development assistance
underpinning about 40 percent of budget expenditures in some years, there is clear importance accorded
to ensuring that synergies are optimized and duplication is minimized. The Government provides
guidance to development partners with respect to breadth and preferred sectors of engagement, an
approach that was introduced in 2010 following an initial internal review of donor engagement across
different sectors (donor mapping) in 2008. The results showed that Rwanda’s more than 30 DPs were not
equitably distributed across EDPRS sectors; there was donor overcrowding is some areas (mainly human
development sectors) and underfunding in others (infrastructure).
Rwanda’s donor division of labour (DOL) is an attempt by the Government of Rwanda to reduce
transaction costs and improve aid effectiveness. The Government’s guidance is that each development
partner engage in a maximum of three sectors. The allocation of sectors among different donors was
guided by several factors, including: (i) budget gaps in EDPRS priority sectors, (ii) ability of donor(s) to
provide the Government’s preferred aid modality/type, (iii) a track record in the sector/contribution to key
development results, (iv) mandate of the donor, (v) donor’s record against a range of aid effectiveness
indicators, and (vi) donor expertise and global experience.
Although the guidance proposes a maximum of three sectors per donor, it allows the use of
delegated cooperation/silent partnership agreements. This provides a phased approach through which
a given donor could continue to support in a number of sectors (in the medium term), while at the same
time taking steps to streamline policy dialogue and reporting. The DOL excludes: (i) sector budget
support, (ii) basket funds, (iii) support to exceptional expenditures such as demobilization, regional
projects, and emergency assistance, and (iv) support to NGOs and private sector entities (the latter being
the reason why IFC and MIGA are not guided by the DOL).
The areas of engagement identified through the WBG strategic planning process fit within the
framework for donor mapping. The strategy proposes that IDA will be directed to projects in urban and
energy sectors, through program for results to agriculture and accountable governance and through policy
operations to the social protection. The World Bank therefore occupies four sectors, though social
protection does not “count” because it will be in the form of budget support. Our fifth area, accountable
governance, is considered a cross-cutting area and therefore is in addition to the sector engagement.
Tables 1 and 2 below show the proposed DOL among non-UN Agencies and UN Agencies as of October
2013. The priorities of this strategy are reflected in the DOL.
Interface between the Government and development partners takes place at sector level, through
the sector working group, and at a cross-sector level in the Development Partner Consultative
Group (DPCG). The shift away from budget support has led both development partners and Government
to reconsider the roles of these groups. At the time of writing, terms of reference for both the sector and
cross-sector levels are under discussion. For the DPCG, the structure and modus operandi of the group is
also under discussion.
Within the framework of aid coordination and policy dialogue, the role of the lead donor is critical,
including being in regular contact with the client and coordination with other donors. It calls for
significant allocation of resources in terms of time, finances, and technical skills. The Government asks
that lead organizations have technical skills based in country. The World Bank has been asked to lead in
energy and urban development and to take an active role in agriculture (where we have handed the lead to
the EU). The WB also leads in PFM, alongside DFID and participates in the Private Sector Development
and social protection sector working group.

70





B
B

X
S
X
S
X

X
X

S

X S

X
X

X
X
X X
X
S

X
X
X
X

Urban & Rural
Settlement

Environment

X
X

X

Justice Reconciliation
Law & Order

ICT

Social Protection

Private Sector D. &
Youth

B
X
X

X
X
X

Energy

Health

Transport
Water and Sanitation

X

Financial sector

X
X

X

PFM (Including
Economic Governance)

B
X

Decentralization &
Governance

Belgium
Germany
Netherlands
Sweden
UK
USA
AfDB
EC
EIB
WB
Switzerland
Global Fund
France
Luxembourg
Japan
Korea
China
India
Kuwait Fund
Saudi Fund
BADEA
OPEC Fund
ABU Dhabi

Agriculture (Including
feeder Roads )

Education (Including
TVET)

Annex Table 15: Proposed Division of Labor for EDPRS2 Sectors
(Non-UN Agencies)

X
X
X

S

S

S

X

S
S

S
B

X

S
X

B

X

X

X

S

X
X

S X X
S
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X X
X S X
X
X

S

X

S
S
S
S
X
X

B->represents silent partners providing Sector Budget Support
S->represents delegated operations
DoL-> excludes Basket funds and regional operation as well as support to NGOs

71

FAO
X
X
ILO
X
X
UNDP
S
S
X
X
X
UNEP
X
X
S
UNESCO
X
X
S
X
S
UNFPA
X
X
X
S
UNHCR
X
S
X
S
X
UNS
S
X
X
X
HABITAT
UNICEF
X
X
S
X
S
UNIDO
S
X
X
X
UN Women
X
X
X
WFP
X
X
S
X
IFAD
X
X
X
WHO
S
S
X
X
X
UNECA
X
IOM
X
X
X
UNV
X
X
UNAIDS
X
X
X
UNCDF
X
S
ITC
X
S
UNCTAD
X
S
 B -> represents silent partners providing Sector Budget Support
 S -> represents delegated operations
 DoL-> excludes Basket funds and regional operation as well as support to NGOs

PFM (including
Economic
Governance)
Finance Sector

Governance and
Decentralisation

Urban and Rural
Settlement

Justice,
Reconciliation,
Law & Order
Environment

ICT

Private Sector
Development and
Youth
Social Protection

Water &
Sanitation
Energy

Transport

Agriculture
(including feeder
roads)
Health

Education
(Including TVET)

Annex Table 16: Proposed Division of Labor for EDPRS2 Sectors
(UN Agencies)

X
X
X

X

72

Annex 8: Client and Stakeholder Consultations
World Bank and IFC staff held joint consultations with a range of stakeholders on the contextual
analysis and framework for this partnership strategy. Consultations took place over a week in midDecember, 2013 and collectively involved126 individuals representing 58 organizations. The team is
grateful to the National University of Rwanda for hosting the consultations with academia in Huye, to the
Deputy Speaker of Parliament, for hosting consultations in Parliament with parliamentarian and to the
Private Sector Federation for convening the consultations with the representatives from domestic and
foreign enterprises. Other consultations, with civil society, development partners and with Government
partners took place in the World Bank offices. All these consultations were well-attended and vibrant in
discussion, some going well over the allotted two-hour sessions.
Information from these direct consultations is supplemented by the findings of the FY 13 Country
Opinion Survey in Rwanda. In general, the findings of the latest Opinion Survey – which draws on a
sample beyond government to include academia, the private sector, multi-laterals, the media and local
government - show clear signs of improvement in perceptions related to the work of the World Bank.
The FY13 data suggest a noticeable improvement in how aligned the Bank’s priorities are with country
development priorities, how realistic the Bank’s support is, the level of respect with which the Bank
treats stakeholders and the degree to which the Bank’s conditions are reasonable, as well as way the Bank
collaborates with government, donors and stakeholders. The data also notes improvement on how fund
disbursement has improved since 2006.
Key themes arising from the Country Opinion Survey and direct consultations were as follows:


Strong endorsement for both the analytical underpinnings and strategic focus: Government,
parliamentarians and development partners were supportive of the priorities being set for IDA and
cautioned against moving beyond the suggested areas of investment (urban, rural, energy, financial
sector, social protection and accountable governance). Both Government and development partners
felt that areas that were neglected by IDA were well-covered by other development partners. The
private sector particularly welcomed the emphasis on energy and financial sector development, along
with the advisory work that promotes private sector development across the thematic areas. Civil
society and some development partners emphasized the need to incorporate demand-side governance
mechanisms in the World Bank’s Governance work.



Appreciation for the joint World Bank Group approach. In particular, development partners,
Government and representatives of the private sector felt the stronger bonds between IFC and the
World Bank would be useful. There were requests for more presence by MIGA and for more
proactivity in advertising the range of instruments and resources available across the World Bank.
Group. The private sector had a specific set of suggestions for IFC in terms of what kind of
instruments might work well in terms of access to finance, capital market developments and
approaches to direct investments. Access to finance is constrained by the perception by financial
institutions that loans to smaller firms are high risk and the private sector was keen to see a focus on
risk reduction. Government urged IFC to invest in higher-risk ventures.



High demand for capacity building within the public sector and for skill development more
generally. The private sector highlighted the constraints they faced with respect to dealing with low
capacity institutions, with a particular focus on tax administration authorities. Parliamentarians
emphasized the need for developing skills throughout the public sector system and Government asked
that WB projects adopt a more strategic approach to skill development. Civil society groups
highlighted the need for capacity-building at sub-national levels of Government. This emphasis on
skills and capacity echoes the findings of the Opinion Survey where 27 percent of stakeholders
reported that inadequate government capacity is one of the greatest obstacles to reform.

73



Interest in diversified financing instruments. Parliament emphasized the problems that had been
caused by non-delivery or delayed delivery of budget support over the previous year and asked that
the World Bank consider instruments that are predictable and reliable. Government partners proposed
proportions of one-third projects, two-thirds a mix of program for results and development policy
operations. Development partners emphasized the need for the WB to match financing instruments
with an ability to continue to engage in the broader policy dialogue. Civil society requested more
direct financing of NGOs; they welcome the GPSA but find it inadequate relative to financing needs.
Both the private sector and Government asked that the WBG work together to deliver more quickly
on PPPs.



Across all respondents in Opinion Survey, the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Rwanda received
a mean rating of 6.4, slightly lower than the mean effectiveness rating received in the FY ’06
country survey (6.7). Respondents from local governments had the highest ratings for the Bank’s
overall effectiveness whereas respondents from PMUs/consultants/contractors on Bank supported
projects and bilateral/multilateral agencies had significantly lower ratings. Effectiveness ratings
varied across sectors, however, and respondents in FY13 country survey gave significantly higher
mean effectiveness ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness compared to respondents in the FY’06
country survey in the following sectors: energy/natural resource management, global/regional
integration, urban development, information and communications technology, social protection,
transport, and law and justice. Some caution is needed in interpreting these perceptions, since the
Bank has not actually been active in some of these sectors accorded high ratings.



Stakeholders overwhelmingly identify the World Bank’s greatest value-added in relation to its
financial resources (54 percent), the survey findings show clear recognition of the importance of
the Bank’s work in capacity development. There were significant stakeholder group differences
in their ratings of the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities. For the most
part, respondents from private foundations and civil society organizations tended to have the highest
ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness in these areas whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral
agencies tended to have significantly lower ratings.

74

Annex 9: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 - Rwanda
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 2/11/2014

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2011

2012

2013

2014

10
3.1
0.0
0.0
10.0
2.9
28.6

9
2.4
11.1
10.3
11.1
10.3
28.6

8
3.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
24.9

9
3.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.3

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
59
9
1,347.7
184.4
39.0
11.1
28.0
19.4

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

75

Annex 10: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
CAS Annex B8 - Rwanda
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As Of Date 4/21/2014

Closed Projects

76

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

283.40
0.00
1,137.87
63.16
1,421.27
63.16

Total Undisbursed (Active)

327.86

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

327.86

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P146452
P145114
P127105
P112712
P126877
P079414
P126498
P118101
P126440
P114931
P111567
Overall Result

3rd Support to the Soc. Prot. System DPL
Decentralized Service Delivery DPO
Governance & Competitiveness TA Proj
RW Emergency Demob and Reintegration
RW-Support to Social Protection System 1
RW-Transport Sector Development
RW: Feeder Roads Development
RW: Skills Development Project (FY11)
RW: Third Rural Sector Support Project
RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig
Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj.

#
#
MS
S
S
S
#
MS
S
S
MS

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

#
#
MS
S
S
MS
#
MS
S
S
MS

2014
2013
2012
2010
2012
2008
2014
2011
2012
2010
2010

IBRD

IDA

70
50
5
8
50
22
45
30
95.9
69
130
574.9

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

70.22243
2.969252

4.313766
-0.029816

4.363203
45.42388
22.67076
61.66554
47.40874
73.13417
327.858

-6.317013
0.1333333
15.774195
-9.726235
12.112994
13.186484
-109.7844

76

4.682987

0.739776
11.18648
16.60925

Annex 11: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
B8 (IFC) for Rwanda
Rwanda
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 1/31/2014
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2013
0/00
2011
2007
2011
2007
2011
2008
2011

Ab rwanda
Bakhresa rwanda
Bp rwanda
Intraspeed
Kcb r
Mille collines
Msc ltd
Tps (r)
Uob rwanda
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

0
5.79
0
0
4.03
1.33
9.6
1.6
1.48

0.9
0
0.8
0
0
0
3
2.95
0

0
0
0.8
4.4
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
5.79
0
0
4.03
1.33
6.1
1.6
1.48

0.9
0
0.57
0
0
0
3
2.95
0

0
0
0.34
4.4
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

23.83

7.65

5.2

0

0

20.33

7.42

4.74

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

77

Annex 12: Rwanda at a Glance

78

79

Annex 13: IFC Investment Operations Program
Annex B3
Rwanda: IFC Investment Operations Program
2011

2012

2013

2014*

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

27.25
27.25

18.10
18.10

17.09
17.09

6.75
6.75

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
ACCOMMODATION & TOURISM SERVICES
COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT VEHICLES
CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE
FINANCE & INSURANCE
TRANSPORTATION AND WAREHOUSING
Total

4.22
5.87
47.71
20.18
22.02
100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

13.49
86.51

100

100

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quasi loan
Total

16.88
11.01
72.11
100

0
72.37
27.63
4.42
104.42

* Data as of February 01,2014

80

81

