Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report Number: 85251-GE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR GEORGIA
FY2014 – FY2017

April 9, 2014

South Caucasus Country Department
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Europe and Central Asia Department

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Authorization.

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as of February 18, 2014
Currency Unit
US$1.00

Georgia Lari
GEL 1.76

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
CIS
CPRR
CPS
CPSPR
DCFTA
DPL
EBRD
ESW
EU
FDI
FSAP
GCI
GDP
GEF
GEL
IBRD

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Commonwealth of Independent States
Country Program Results Review
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area
Development Policy Lending
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Advisory Program
Global Competitiveness Index
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Georgia Lari
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development

ICT
IDA
IDF
IFC
IMF
ILCS
JICA
KfW
MDG
MTEF
MOF
PER
PFM
PPP
SME
TF
UNDP
UNDP
USAID

Information and Communications Technology
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Integrated Living Conditions Survey
Japan International Development Agency
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
Millennium Development Goal
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Ministry of Finance
Public Expenditure Review
Public Finance Management
Public Private Partnership
Small and Medium-sized Enterprise
Trust Fund
Targeted Social Assistance
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development

World Bank Group Team

Vice President:
Country Director:
Team Leaders:

IBRD/IDA
Laura Tuck
Henry G. R. Kerali
Eavan O’Halloran
Rashmi Shankar

Vice President:
Regional Director:
Team Leaders:

IFC
Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Tomasz Telma
Thomas Lubeck
Iuliia Mironova

GEORGIA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (2014-2017)

Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................................................................... i
I. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ............................................1
A. Political Developments .............................................................................................................. 1
B. Growth, Poverty and Shared Prosperity, and Gender ................................................................ 1
C. Medium-Term Prospects for the Georgian Economy ................................................................ 6

II. GOVERNMENT SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY .......................14
III. WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM .............................................................................15
A. Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback ............................................ 15
B. Portfolio overview and key features ........................................................................................ 17
C. Proposed World Bank Group Support ..................................................................................... 18
D. Implementing the Strategy ....................................................................................................... 28
E. Results...................................................................................................................................... 29

IV. MANAGING RISKS .........................................................................................................30

Figures:
Figure 1: Job Creation in Georgia: Pre-crisis and crisis ...................................................................................2
Figure 2 Poverty and Shared Prosperity in Georgia ...........................................................................................3
Figure 3 Public and Private Health Spending, Europe and Georgia ..................................................................4
Figure 4: Government and Out-Of-Pocket Spending on Health in Europe and Georgia (2010) ........................4

Boxes:
Box 1: Building on a Good Track Record in Public Sector Management and Governance..............................10
Box 2: Pillars of the Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SDS) .................................................................14
Box 3: Key Results of the Georgia Country Survey (Spring 2013) ....................................................................16
Box 4: Consultations with civil society, government and the private sector .....................................................28

Tables:
Table 1: Status of Achievement of Selected MDGs ..............................................................................................5
Table 2: Macroeconomic Trends and Projections ...............................................................................................7

Annexes:
Annex 1: Georgia FY14-17 CPS Results Matrix...............................................................................................33
Annex 2: FY10-13 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY COMPLETION REPORT ..........................38
Annex 3: Donor Table .....................................................................................................................................69
Annex 4: Consultations on the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) ............................................................70
Annex 5: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .............................................74
Annex 6: Operations Portfolio.........................................................................................................................75
Annex 7: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio................................................76
Annex 8: Proposed Lending .............................................................................................................................77

Map of Georgia (IBRD33410R)

This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was prepared by a joint WBG team led by Eavan
O’Halloran and Rashmi Shankar under the guidance of Henry Kerali and Thomas Lubeck, with
significant contribution from Carla Pittalis, Iullia Mironova and Luis Alvaro Sanchez.
Core team members included Ahmed Eiweida, Angela Prigozhina, Sophie Devnosadze, Inga
Paichadze, Maia Duishvili, Mona Prasad, Thea Gigiberis, Siddhartha Raja, Claudia Rokx,
Mariam Dolidze, Nistha Sinha, Nino Kutateladze, Olivier Lambert, Salvador Rivera, Yukari
Tsuchiya, Franciscus Linder, and Tamar Kobakhidze. Other team members who contributed to
the CPS included Mustapha Benmaamar, Adrian Fozzard, David Bernstein, Adriana
Damianova, Andrew Michael Mitchell, Joanna De Berry, Alberto Rodriguez, Carlos SilvaJauregui, Galina Alagardava, Luis-Felipe Lopez-Calva, Carolina Sanchez-Paramo, Daniel
Dulitzky, Meskerem (Lily) Mulatu, Susanna Hayrapetyan, Darejan Kapanadze, Ghada Younes,
Dina Umali-Deininger, Daniel Villar, Feyi Boroffice, Dandan Chen, John Gabriel Goddard,
Gayane Minasyan, Gerrardo Corrochano, Ivailo Izvorski, Jean Michel Happi, Sarah Nedolast,
Juan Gaviria, Kulsum Ahmed, Larry Bouton, Ranjit Lamech, Rebekka Grun, Tamuna
Namicheishvili, Sandro Nozadze.
The team would like to thank Mark Griffiths, Azim Sadikov and other colleagues at the IMF for
their good collaboration, as well as those colleagues at international and donor organizations,
NGOs, civil society groups, private sector and other stakeholders who contributed or supported
the preparation of the CPS.
The team would especially like to thank counterparts in the Government of Georgia for their
support, cooperation and guidance.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The objectives of this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS FY2014-FY2017) are to help
end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity in Georgia in a sustainable manner. The
CPS comes at a propitious time for Georgia. The Government has outlined its vision in the SocioEconomic Development Strategy (SDS) that has the over-arching objective to achieve faster,
inclusive and sustainable growth, while seeking a greater focus on social outcomes and poverty
reduction. The objectives of this CPS are thus fully aligned with the Government’s SDS. The design
of the CPS is based on available analytical work on the drivers of growth and inclusion and
identifies two areas of focus that will support achievement of the objectives:
1.

a.

Strengthening public service delivery to promote inclusive growth: the goal is to
accompany the Government in its commitment to increasing budgetary resources for social
sector programs in a fiscally sustainable way. This area of focus supports improving the
effectiveness and efficiency in the delivery of public services where there is a known link to
reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity;

b.

Enabling private sector-led job creation through improved competitiveness: the goal is to
support a sustainable pattern of growth that generates employment and provides income
opportunities for the bottom 40 percent of the population. The private sector will be the
driver of employment creation. The CPS contribution focuses on removing important
constraints in finance, infrastructure, technology and skills that prevent the private sector
from thriving.

The CPS program is geared to empower Georgia to take advantage of the opportunities
available for growth, employment and inclusion. Georgia is located along a strategic corridor
connecting Europe and Asia, has significant renewable hydropower energy resources, diverse
climates and sceneries that augur well for tourism, and good potential for higher value-added
agricultural production. Georgia initialed the Association Agreement with the European Union (EU)
and its integral part – the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA) - in November 2013,
thereby opening up significant opportunities for trade and investment. In parallel, the Government is
committed to a more inclusive growth model that is fiscally sustainable by strengthening the
efficiency of public service delivery and increasing social expenditures to levels more comparable to
other ECA countries.
2.

The WBG’s strong engagement in Georgia to date and the Government’s SDS set a
good foundation. The current WBG program is selective and coordinated with the other
development partners’ programs. Performance on support to reforms, project implementation and the
quality of knowledge has been strong. The program has maintained balance between stimulating
growth through business environment reforms and enhanced infrastructure while, in parallel,
supporting poverty reduction through improved public expenditure management, a more effective
social protection system, and reforms in the health and education systems.
3.

The CPS maximizes the financial and knowledge resources of the WBG for Georgia. The
lending program includes the remaining IDA allocation (Georgia is expected to graduate from IDA
at the end of FY14), the full volume of IBRD available, a broad package of IFC investments and the
4.

i

full menu of MIGA products where demanded. Selectivity in the delivery of analytical and advisory
services (AAA) is driven by alignment to the twin goals and complementarity with the CPS
objectives. The CPS pro-actively commits to monitoring progress towards results, introducing
corrective measures and fine-tuning as new knowledge is gained. Finally, the program will generate
knowledge on gender issues and support the collection and analysis of gender disaggregated data.
Strict selectivity criteria were applied to the choice of engagement areas in the CPS. The
CPS reflects ownership as the program focuses on areas are where the Government has specifically
asked for WBG support taking into account the WBG’s value-added and other partners’ programs.
The engagement areas rank high as potential drivers of poverty reduction and shared prosperity, as
identified in the analysis. The CPS program builds on the successful elements of the existing
program and a good track record of implementation. The program allows for the WBG’s global
knowledge to play a critical role and, finally, targets areas where the WBG can achieve measurable
results.
5.

The CPS outlines mitigating measures to contain the risks to the program. The risk to
delivery of the ambitious program from the domestic political context is mitigated by ensuring close
alignment with the Government’s SDS and anchoring the program in evidence based decision
making. Public sector capacity poses risks which are mitigated through a broad package of support,
coordinated with other development partners, and through focus on capacity building, results-based
planning and “delivering for impact”. The risk that employment generation may continue to lag is
mitigated through a comprehensive focus on economic competitiveness, while recognizing that
expectations for radical transformation should be modest within the CPS time frame.
Macroeconomic risks are mitigated by the Government’s commitment to a sound fiscal policy
framework, anchored in fiscal consolidation and efficient public financial management, with broad
support from the WBG, the IMF and other partners. Should these risks materialize; the program will
be adapted at the mid-way point as the two-fold focus of the CPS on enabling job creation by the
private sector and effective public service delivery allows for a balanced approach that can be finetuned during implementation.
6.

ii

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA
A.

Political Developments

The parliamentary elections of October 2012 and the presidential elections one year
later ushered in a new government led by the Georgia Dream coalition. The one year period
between the two elections was marked by policy uncertainty and slow implementation of public
programs that resulted in diminished consumer and investor confidence and significantly lower
growth. After the presidential elections, Irakli Gharibashvili was appointed the new Prime
Minister and head of Government, and under the new constitution has full executive authority
over domestic and foreign policy. The new government subsequently embarked on the
preparation of a medium-term development vision articulated in the draft Socioeconomic
Development Strategy (SDS) 2020, in which this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, for the
period FY14-17) is anchored. The overarching objective of the SDS is to achieve faster, and
more inclusive and sustainable growth.
1.

2.
Georgia has taken steps to strengthen significantly market access and establish
closer economic ties with the European Union (EU). It initialed the Association Agreement
with the EU at the Vilnius summit in November 2013, which paves the way for a Deep and
Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA). This represents an important opportunity for
Georgia to strengthen its cooperation with Europe on political, economic, social and security
issues, and to benefit from bilateral free trade. Relations with Russia are showing signs of
improvement, as witnessed by the formal lifting of a ban on the import of wine and mineral
waters from Georgia, which has already led to an increase in trade between the two countries.
B.

Growth, Poverty and Shared Prosperity, and Gender

Sources of Growth
3.
Growth in Georgia averaged nearly 6 percent p.a. during 2004-2013. While Georgia
remains one of the very few countries in Europe and Central Asia (ECA) that have not yet caught
up to their 1990 real GDP level, it has benefited from a noteworthy push on structural reforms
and liberalization starting in 2004. Improvements in the business environment, infrastructure
quality, public finance, and reduced trade barriers stimulated investments. GDP per capita
increased from $920 in 2003 to $3,597 in 2013 although it is still among the lowest in ECA.
4.
Georgia did not experience the structural transformation associated with pushing
resources and productivity growth towards the export sectors. While it achieved global
recognition as a top performer on the Doing Business rankings, productivity gains were
concentrated mainly in non-tradables, which is where FDI flowed largely to. At the same time,
agriculture was not a public policy priority until 2012, in spite of absorbing a significant
proportion of the labor force. As a result, while growth rates have been impressive on average,
there was no strong revival of labor-intensive manufacturing or productive transformation of
agriculture or agri-business.
5.
Growth stemmed mainly from capital inflows before the twin crises of 2008 and
from high public capital spending after. Growth was fueled by high foreign direct investment
before the global economic crisis of 2008, a period of easy finance world-wide. This led to
booming consumption, imports, and investment and allowed Georgia to incur a large current
1

account deficit – reaching 20 percent in 2007 before moderating to a still high 11-12 percent
range over 2011-2012. The twin shocks in 2008 of the global economic crisis and the conflict
with Russia interrupted capital inflows and private investment and growth plummeted – in 2009
GDP contracted by 3.8 percent. The Government was quick to implement a fiscal stimulus to
support recovery, including a large public investment package and increased social transfers.
These efforts paid off and growth quickly rebounded, averaging more than 5 percent during
2010-2013.
6.
Despite growth, unemployment
Figure 1: Job Creation in Georgia: Pre-crisis and
stayed high and it remains the most
crisis
significant
public
policy
challenge.
Job Creation
Job Destruction
Net Job Creation
Georgia’s robust growth performance was
accompanied by high unemployment, which
11.2
10.9
remained in the 12-13 percent range even
8.4
6.8
during the pre-crisis boom. Unemployment
peaked to 17 percent in 2010 and then fell to
2.1
0.2
15 percent in 2012. As shown in Figure 1,
Georgia was able to create significant new
-0.8
employment but this has been insufficient to
-4.6
bring about overall net job creation. Labor
-8.2
-9.1
shedding in the public sector and as an
-11.4
-11.7
outcome of economic transformation in some
2007
2008
2009
2010
of the older sectors meant that there was
significant labor churning and little net job Source: Staff calculations with GeoStat data
creation. New growth sectors, especially in
tourism and other service sectors, have not been able to generate formal employment as
effectively as a robust agri-business or manufacturing sector would have. The majority of the
work force – more than 55 percent – is employed in agriculture (mostly self-employed), which
contributes only 8.2 percent of GDP and is characterized by largely family-based subsistence
farming with a relatively small agri-business sector. Low productivity levels in agriculture have
contributed significantly to high rural poverty.
Poverty and Shared Prosperity: Trends and Drivers
7.
Reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity remain a challenge in Georgia.
Poverty and extreme poverty, measured using absolute poverty lines anchored on the national
relative poverty and extreme poverty lines, 1 are high in Georgia compared to other countries in
the region. In 2012, 14.8 percent and 3.7 percent of the population lived in poverty and extreme
poverty respectively. Consumption growth among the bottom 40 percent of the population, the
World Bank’s indicator of shared prosperity, was also lower than for the population as a whole
for the period 2006-2010 (Figure 2). This was reversed in 2010-2012 mainly due to the benefits
of the fiscal stimulus rolled out in the period after the global economic crisis that increased social
transfers and finally brought about an improved shared prosperity of the bottom 40 percent.

1

An absolute poverty line is used to facilitate comparisons of poverty performance over time in Georgia. The 2012 values were
GEL 91.2 per adult equivalent per month and GEL 52.9 per adult equivalent per month (extreme or food poverty line).

2

Figure 2 Poverty and Shared Prosperity in Georgia
(World Bank Staff calculations using Integrated Household Survey data)
35
30
25

$1,595

$1,795 $1,839 $1,758 $1,851

10

6.0

2000.0

4.0

1500.0

20
15

$1,969

2500.0

18
5.4

20.1
6.0

2.0

21.0
17.7
5.2

17.7

17.4
5.1

6.7

5.4

$2,077

14.8
5.5

5

3.7

0

3.6
2.0
1.2

0.7

0.3

1000.0

0.0
2006 - 2012

500.0

2006 - 2008

-2.0

2010 - 2012

-2.0

0.0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

2008 - 2010

-4.0

Poverty Headcount

-4.9

-6.0

Extreme Poverty Headcount

All

GDP per capita (2005 US$)

Bottom 40%

8.
High unemployment contributes to the weak link between growth and poverty
reduction. Strong economic growth in 2006-2008 was accompanied by stubbornly high
unemployment in the 12 to 13 percent range and very limited wage growth, while the crisis
resulted in significant employment losses. Labor income, the main source of income for most
households, declined causing poverty to rise from 18 percent in 2006 to 21 percent in 2010,
while consumption growth among the bottom 40 percent was just 0.7 percent in 2006-2008 and
minus 4.9 percent in 2008-2010 (Figure 2).
9.
In recent years, the social protection system has played an important part in
reducing poverty. The Government’s response post-crisis was to increase social transfers (both
pensions and the Targeted Social Assistance - TSA) and public investment. Both measures had a
direct impact on household income, as noted in the improvement in the shared prosperity
indicator for 2010-2012 and the significant drop in poverty from 21 percent in 2010 to 14.8
percent in 2012. In 2011, an estimated 56 percent of the population and 60 percent of the bottom
20 percent of the population lived in a household that received old-age pensions, 2 which
accounted for nearly 60 percent of the bottom quintiles’ and 13 percent of top quintiles’ average
consumption expenditure. The increases in pension and TSA benefits had a large impact on the
welfare of these groups. Similarly, higher employment and wages in the construction and related
sectors due to high public investment supported an increase in labor income. Declining food and
energy prices reduced the cost of the basic basket consumed by the less well off—simulations
suggest that poverty levels would have been more than 2 percentage points higher in 2012 had
inflation rates followed past trends. In 2013, TSA and pensions were increased by 100 and 50
percent respectively which is expected to have a positive impact on decreasing poverty rates.
2

UNICEF’s Welfare Monitoring Survey, 2011 round.

3

10.
The probability of being poor or among the bottom 40 percent is strongly associated
with labor market status, gender and limited access to economic opportunities. The poor
and those in the bottom 40 percent are more likely to live: (i) in larger households with greater
number of dependents, and headed by someone with less than secondary education and/or a
woman; (ii) in households suffering larger unemployment and inactivity rates, and headed by a
self-employed individual; and (iii) in rural areas. Furthermore, Georgia has one of the highest
incidences of Internally Displaced People (IDPs) in the world (estimated at 5.6 percent of the
population). IDPs are dependent on subsistence agriculture and on social assistance, with limited
recourse to adequate housing, sustainable livelihoods and jobs. Rates of employment and
economic self-reliance are low among IDPs and they account for a disproportionate amount of
the poor. 3 Over 17 percent of IDPs are unable to afford nutrition or suffering from systematic
starvation while only 48 percent claim average or above average nutrition levels.
11.
Historically low public spending on health and education has contributed to poor
social outcomes. Spending on education as a share of GDP has oscillated between just 2 and 3
percent since the late 1990s including for pre-school (about 0.2 percent of GDP in 2011.) 4
(Figure 3). This has contributed to weak labor mobility across sectors and to inadequate skills
development among poor households, leading to high unemployment among the bottom 40
percent, even during periods of high GDP growth. Georgia took part in the PISA 2009 education
evaluation and its scores were far lower than expected: just 38 percent of students are estimated
to have a proficiency in reading literacy, 31 percent in mathematics and 34 percent proficient in
science. 5 Health emergencies are impoverishing for vulnerable groups: out of pocket spending
has been amongst the highest in the ECA region at over 70 percent of total health spending
(Figure 4). In parallel, drug spending is high at 3-4 percent of GDP and pharmaceutical
expenditures accounted for up to 43 percent of total health expenditures and up to 60 percent of
household health expenditures in 2012.
Figure 3: Public and Private Health Spending,
Europe and Georgia

Figure 4: Government and Out-Of-Pocket Spending
on Health in Europe and Georgia (2010)

(in percent of GDP)

(in percent of total and percent of GDP)

Private

80

Public

Out of pocket spending as share of total

12%

10%
2.2%

% of GDP

8%

6%

1.7%
5.8%

4%

2.3%
7.5%
4.7%

2%

3.2%
2.0%

0%
Source: WHO and HUES

EU-15

EU-10

CIS

70

Georgia

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

Source: WHO and HUES

Georgia

Source: WHO and HUES

2

4

6

8

Government health spending as % of GDP

Source: WHO and HUES

3

World Bank, 2013 ‘Supporting the Livelihoods of Displaced Persons in Georgia’
Source: MoF; Survey of Municipalities; ISET Policy Institute (2012).
5
There was no significant difference in the performance of boys and girls in math or reading, although there was a statistically
significant gender difference of 19 score points in scientific literacy favoring girls.
4

4

10

12.
While Georgia is on track to achieving several of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) by 2015, important challenges remain, which can undermine the social
sustainability of the observed trends. There has been significant progress in recent years with
declining infant and maternal mortality; full enrolment in primary education, with higher ratio of
girls to boys in primary and secondary education; and increased proportion of the population
with access to safe water sources. However, significant inequalities remain in terms of access to
basic services and economic opportunities between the poor, the less well-off and marginalized
population groups and the rest of the population.
Table 1: Status of Achievement of Selected MDGs
Current
Status

Key Social Indicators/MDGs
1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Poverty headcount (below national poverty line)

14.8% (2012)

Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)
2. Achieve universal primary education
Primary school enrolment (gross, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
3. Eliminate education gender disparity & empower women
Share of women in wage employment in non-ag. sector (%)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary education (%)
4. Reduce child mortality by two-thirds
Under five mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
5. Reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)

6. Halt/reverse HIV/AIDS and other diseases
HIV prevalence (% of population ages 15-49)

Tuberculosis incidence (per 100,000 people)

1.1% (2009)

2015
Attainment by 2015
Targets
Halve the ratios Progress made
between 1990
and 2015
Achieved

106.1 (2012)
108.1 (2012)

100%
100%

42% (2012)
101.2 (2012,
primary only)

50%
100

20 (2012)
22.8 – National
estimate 2012;
(2010, WDI
estimate is 67)
0.3%
(2012, WDI)
116 (2012, WDI);
84.1 – national
estimate 2012

reduce by 2/3
between 19902015
reduce

reduced
incidence

Achieved
Progress, but unlikely to be
achieved
Achieved
Possible to achieve.
Indicator was 47 in 1990 so
a 2/3rd reduction is 16
Possible to achieve. Georgia
is close to achieving the
high income rate of 14.
Not likely to be achieved.
HIV/AIDS went from 0.2%
to 0.3% from 2010-2012,
Achieved. TB has been
reduced from 128 in 2010

Source: World Development Indicators (WDI)

Gender
13.
Gender inequalities remain constraints to more robust and inclusive growth.
Georgia ranks low in the World Gender Inequality Index (81 out of 195 countries in 2012). 6
Work undertaken for the Gender Assessment (forth coming) reveals the following dimensions:
• Human capital: Sex ratios at birth are significantly skewed, indicating a strong preference
for boys: estimates show that 109.4 boys were born for every 100 girls in 2012, and the trend
has remained steady since the mid-1990s. This phenomenon is symptomatic of gender
inequalities, as well as an increased availability of scanning technologies to determine the sex
of the child in utero. While the primary school enrollment gap closed in 2010 and tertiary
enrollment is slightly higher among women, selection of disciplines in higher education
6

A Country Gender Assessment is underway in Georgia to further this knowledge, as per the requirements of OP/BP 4.20

5

institutions suggest a persistent gender divide, with far more males self-selecting into math,
sciences, medicine and engineering, while girls self-select into lower-paying disciplines such
as education. Maternal mortality rates are low (22.8 per 100,000 live births) compared to the
average for lower middle income countries, with universal access to prenatal care (84 percent
of pregnant women received prenatal care in 2012). Fertility levels are low: WDI data
indicate a fall from the already low rate of 1.62 children per woman in 2000 to 1.55 in 2010.
The gender gap in life expectancy is high, and men live on average 9 years less than women.
• Economic sphere: Only 60 percent of women, compared to 78 percent of men, are either
employed or looking for a job, and two-thirds of employed women are self-employed
(mainly in agriculture). Given cultural norms, and the constraints posed by their roles as caregivers to children and elderly relatives, women are more likely to aim for part-time work,
particularly teaching and secure public sector jobs. While legislation does not permit
discrimination, the wage gap is one of the highest in ECA, with women earning on average
45 percent less than men in 2011. Female entrepreneurship is low, especially in the formal
sector. Only 41 percent of firms with more than 5 employees are at least partly owned by
women and only 20 percent of firms are female-managed. Women increasingly represent
about half of the total labor migrants, and are generally more skilled, sending on average
higher remittances than men.
• Legal framework and political sphere: The legal framework for women’s rights provides
for equal access to labor market, inheritance and protection of property rights. In practice,
women have fewer protections due to weak enforcement mechanisms and lower levels of
literacy. The Law on Gender Equality (2010) prohibits discrimination and harassment based
on sex, and several legal provisions are in place to allow women to combine their dual role of
mothers and workers; the new government has made public kindergartens free of charge,
potentially providing more opportunities for women to pursue employment. However,
women are underrepresented in political institutions, an indication of their lesser public role
and traditional gender norms, which limit their voice and agency in the public sphere.
• Strengthening gender statistics: The commitment to collecting and using gender
disaggregated statistics is enshrined in the 2010 Law and its Action Plan. In addition to
regular Household Surveys, the 2014 Census offers further opportunities for sexdisaggregated data to promote evidence-based policymaking and more equal outcomes for
men and women in Georgia.
C.

Medium-Term Prospects for the Georgian Economy

14.
Economic growth is projected at an average of 5.5 percent a year over the mediumterm based on greater policy certainty, improved market access, and a strong reform
agenda (Table 2). Medium-term growth prospects depend on a number of factors, including
improved economic ties with the EU, improved relations with Russia (which will benefit trade
and tourism), and the robust reform program outlined in the SDS, which will support growth in
private investment and reduce reliance on public capital spending. Growth prospects depend on
Georgia’s ability to leverage the DCFTA and Association Agreement with the EU, which will

6

improve market access and encourage FDI. A trade sustainability impact analysis 7 commissioned
by the EU suggests a potential increase in GDP growth of 4.3 percent in the long-run. This will
call for labor and capital reallocations to more productive sectors, involving capacity building on
regulatory approximation particularly in trade facilitation, technical barriers to trade, and
intellectual property rights and upgrading of and investment in human capital.
Table 2: Macroeconomic Trends and Projections
2010

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
2011
2012
2013
2014p
2015p
Actuals

National Accounts
Real GDP growth (percent change)
Consumer Price Index (percent change)
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Gross investment
Public
Private
Gross national savings
General Government Operations
Revenues and grants
Tax revenues
Non-tax revenues
Expenditure and net lending
Current expenditure
Social expenses
Capital expenditure and net lending
Overall fiscal balance
External Sector
Current account balance
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
FDI (net)
Gross international reserves
(Months imports of goods and services)
(In millions of dollars)
Total public sector debt

2016p

2017p

Projections

6.3
7.1

7.2
8.5

6.2
-0.9

3.2
-0.5

5.0
4.0

5.5
4.5

6.0
5.0

6.0
5.0

2,614
21.6
7.4
14.2
11.3

3,220
26.2
8.0
18.2
13.4

3,515
28.9
6.8
22.1
17.3

3,597
24.8
5.2
19.7
18.9

3,716
26.2
5.9
20.2
18.0

4,031
27.4
6.0
21.4
19.7

4,397
27.8
6.1
21.7
20.2

4,844
28.0
6.1
21.9
20.5

28.3
23.5
4.8
34.8
26.4
7.8
8.4
-6.5

28.2
25.2
3.0
31.7
23.0
6.8
8.8
-3.5

28.9
25.1
3.7
31.7
24.8
6.7
6.8
-2.8

27.6
24.8
2.8
30.1
24.9
8.6
5.2
-2.5

26.9
24.2
2.7
30.7
24.8
9.6
5.9
-3.8

27.4
24.8
2.6
30.5
24.5
9.6
6.0
-3.0

27.4
24.8
2.5
30.1
24.0
9.5
6.1
-2.7

27.4
24.9
2.5
29.7
23.6
9.3
6.1
-2.3

-10.3
34.9
52.7

-12.7
36.5
55.5

-11.7
38.1
57.8

-5.9
44.7
57.7

-8.1
45.3
59.2

-7.8
46.4
59.4

-7.6
47.1
59.8

-7.5
47.9
60.0

5.8

6.2

3.9

5.6

6.2

6.3

6.3

6.3

4.4
2,264
38.7

4.2
2,818
33.6

3.8
2,873
32.2

3.7
2,823
32.2

3.6
2,914
34.5

3.8
3,362
33.4

3.8
3,739
33.0

3.9
4,183
32.7

Source: World Bank staff estimates based on data from the IMF and the Georgian authorities.

15.
Fiscal consolidation is a policy priority for the government in spite of a widening
deficit in 2014. Due to under-execution of the budget, the overall fiscal deficit was estimated at
2.5 percent of GDP in 2013. The deficit is expected to widen in 2014 with a pick-up in social
expenditures and relatively lower revenues due to the lagged impact of the growth slowdown in
2013. Over the medium-term the deficit is expected to narrow again, mainly because of
strengthened expenditure efficiency. The share of capital expenditures will level off, with social
7

See Trade Sustainability Impact Assessment in Support of Negotiations of a DCFTA between the EU and Georgia and the
Republic of Moldova, October 2012.

7

spending – which grew significantly in 2013 and will rise to over 9 percent of GDP in the
medium term – rising to tilt the balance in favor of current expenditures. The introduction of
universal health care in 2013 and higher planned benefit levels under pensions and targeted
social assistance will contribute to budgeted social expenditures being 51 percent higher by 2014
than in 2012. To achieve the desired outcomes, strengthening the effectiveness of social
spending and supporting the Government on developing the institutions and capacity to support
program implementation and strategic, evidence-based planning will be crucial, especially given
Georgia’s ageing population and the high dependence on fiscal transfers among vulnerable
groups. Debt is sustainable in the medium-term according to the most recent WB-IMF analysis.
16.
The renewed focus on competitiveness and fiscal consolidation will support external
sustainability. Lower spending in 2013 helped reduce the current account deficit. Higher
economic activity and public spending in 2014 will cause the current account deficit to increase
before falling again in the medium-term due to improved competitiveness – driven by the
Government’s ambitious structural reforms – and a narrowing fiscal deficit. Net FDI is expected
to average around 6.3 percent of GDP while the national savings rate is expected to increase to
20.5 percent by 2017, reducing dependence on debt creating capital inflows.
17.
The Government’s commitment to sound macro-economic and prudent fiscal
management is a pre-condition for faster, inclusive and sustainable growth. Various
measures to strengthen macroeconomic fundamentals and promote longer term and local
currency credit instruments to deepen financial access and reduce reliance on forex borrowing
will improve the credibility of the banking system, support domestic savings, and help create
conditions for macroeconomic stability and external sustainability. Currently high dollarization
and limited capital market development has weakened the transmission channels for monetary
policy generating reliance on fiscal policy for responding to even temporary shocks. The
Government’s commitment to work with the World Bank and the IMF on these issues, along
with the program of structural reforms outlined in the Government’s Strategy document, will
help reduce this excessive reliance on fiscal policy instruments. Plans to increase social
expenditures in the medium term while maintaining capital expenditures will require a rigorous
prioritization of spending and efficient implementation, with a strong focus on results. The
government plans to develop Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) to leverage public resources and
strengthen private participation in the provision of high quality and accessible public services,
which will also strengthen its fiscal position.
18.
Reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity calls for a combination of
policies aimed at more efficient and effective public service delivery and enhancing
economic opportunities. Expansionary fiscal policy was been the main driver of poverty
reduction and shared prosperity in 2010-2012 and the Government has committed to increase
social spending from 6.8 percent of GDP in 2011 to 9.3 percent in 2017. However, improving
the efficiency and effectiveness of this expenditure will be essential to ensure fiscal sustainability
and impact. In particular, challenges related to funds absorption and adequate implementation of
policy reforms could be significant, especially in the context of decentralization, which will
move the management of some aspects of key social services to local governments.

8

D.

Opportunities and Challenges to Achieving Inclusive Growth

19.
Georgia has the potential to increase sustainable and inclusive growth through
strengthened focus on private sector-led job creation and the effectiveness of public
spending. Although Georgia has achieved good growth rates, unemployment remains stubbornly
high, especially among the bottom 40, leading to a weak performance on poverty reduction and
on shared prosperity. At the same time, low agricultural productivity and uneven access to public
services has contributed to high rural poverty. Women’s participation in the labor force is low
and vulnerable groups remain marginalized, both socially and economically. Progress on poverty
and shared prosperity since 2010 was largely driven by fiscal transfers, which is not sustainable.
The Government envisions a comprehensive reform effort that aims at addressing a two-fold
challenge: (i) ensure effective public service delivery, particularly in the social sectors, to
support inclusion; and (ii) improve competitiveness to enable private sector led job creation and
sustainable growth
Opportunities for faster and more inclusive growth
20.
The DCFTA offers an opportunity to enhance prospects for exports and investment.
While legislative and regulatory approximation with the EU has proceeded at a good pace,
Georgia must now address a complex complementary policy reform agenda to support private
sector competitiveness. Domestic firms will need to modernize in order to enhance productivity,
which will call for access to both human and financial capital and efforts to facilitate resource
reallocations to the productive and tradables sectors, which need to expand. At the same time,
foreign investment in these sectors will help bridge financing needs and support transfer of
improved technology and skills. Improving standards by developing the requisite quality
infrastructure and sanitary/phyto-sanitary systems according to EU requirements and norms will
be essential for entry into the more lucrative and stable EU market.
21.
Continued strengthening of Georgia’s transit infrastructure will support
competitiveness. Located along a strategic transit corridor connecting Europe and Asia, Georgia
is strengthening connectivity to the global economy by developing the strategic East-West
Highway corridor between the Black Sea ports and the Caspian Sea. This will provide direct
access to 2.2 million people, or around half of the population and will allow Georgia to lower
transit costs and become more competitive as an international transport route. Additionally, most
of the rural population is in regions that rank low on accessibility and have worse socioeconomic outcomes than the national average. Investments in local and secondary roads will
address the transport needs of low-income populations, and the improved domestic connectivity
will facilitate access to economic opportunities and promote inclusive growth in rural areas.
22.
Georgia's energy sector has potential for transformational change, particularly
through renewable energy exports. Over the last decade, the Government has transformed the
energy sector, ensuring fast growth with improved efficiency. The government is pursuing two
strategic objectives: to ensure continued reliable domestic energy supply for firms and homes;
and to facilitate and bolster electricity production from hydropower plants (HPPs) to expand
regional electricity trade. Important institutional and regulatory reforms have been initiated to
support private investment in energy. The priorities now are to work for: (a) adopting market
rules to facilitate trade through compliance with the EU Energy regulations applicable to Georgia
under the Association Agreement and the Community Treaty; (b) implementing international
standards for environmental and social impact assessments and mitigation; (c) strengthening the
9

transmission network capacity to improve reliability and support electricity trade; and (d)
creating the conditions for efficient private investment in hydro power and other renewables.
Given its geographic location, Georgia remains an important regional transit route for oil and
natural gas and can leverage this advantage for electricity trade.
Box 1: Building on a Good Track Record in Public Sector Management and Governance
• Georgia has advanced in public sector management practices with progress evident across the majority of
indicators under the PEFA assessment. Its latest ranking on the 2013 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index was 55 out of 175 countries. The challenge going forward is to consolidate and continue
to progress to ensure effective service delivery and partnership with the private sector, especially in the light
of the need to improve effectiveness of social and public investment spending.
• There are capacity weaknesses in budget implementation, monitoring of fiscal risks from State-Owned
Enterprises (SOEs), internal controls and audits, and public sector accounting and oversight. Improving
public enterprise performance will require fundamental changes in their governance structures as corporate
governance of the SOEs falls short of internationally accepted good practice. The absence of adequate
accounting and reporting standards is a bottleneck to fiscal transparency and accountability.
• The Government plans to develop a PPP framework with institutions for project identification, coordination,
and implementation. This will also support effective functioning of the investment funds. The infrastructure
investment needs, including those emerging from the decentralization, will require a strong public
investment management system to ensure value for money, contain fiscal risks, and maintenance of existing
infrastructure. Public procurement must continue to be strengthened to bolster good implementation.
• A decentralization strategy setting out a preliminary framework for public financing of municipal regional
development was adopted in early 2013, which has the potential for better delivery of services. Despite
overall improvement in accessibility to municipal services and infrastructure (almost meeting the MDGs),
there is a pending agenda on quality and reliability of services, especially in secondary cities, towns and
villages. Strengthening the effectiveness of municipal asset management plans and provision for annual
maintenance is essential to support sustainability.
• There is a need to establish an effective system to carry out decentralized functions, with sufficient transfers
based on an incentive compatible intergovernmental fiscal relationship. Realism about the pace of reform
will help focus scarce administrative capacities. Increased civic engagement through strengthened local
participation and social accountability in local decision making is an objective of the Government although
mechanisms available are still nascent. Decentralization may help strengthen public sector delivery at the
local level if effectively managed, but significant investment in the municipal sector is still needed.

Challenge: Strengthening public sector delivery
23.
The public sector’s capacity to deliver positive outcomes on poverty and shared
prosperity will have to be strengthened. The Government has committed to increase the
resources allocated for social spending. However, it needs to improve its capacity to deliver
services in order to avoid fiscal pressures and to assure timely results on the ground to build the
confidence of its population. The move towards decentralization puts added pressure to improve
efficiency because some of the high priority social services – including universal pre-school
education – are delivered by local governments which lack capacity. The introduction of
universal health coverage will also call for significant support, especially to strengthen
implementation capacity.
24.
While there is a well-designed TSA program in place, coverage of the chronically
poor needs to be broadened. Currently less than half of the bottom decile is covered.
Broadening this would create more positive impacts on poverty without compromising fiscal
policy: the TSA costs about 1 percent of GDP (in line with the rest of the ECA region). Any
increased focus and expenditure on the social sectors will need to be carefully implemented to
10

ensure fiscal sustainability and effective results. A notable feature in Georgia is that the
increased impact of the social protection system to date was brought about in the context of an
overall fiscal consolidation.
25.
Improvement in the pension system has to be reconciled with the requirements of
fiscal sustainability while ensuring adequate pension levels over time. Projections of the
current pension system show that due to population aging, the costs of the universal flat benefit
may double from the current 4 percent of GDP to 8 percent in 2050 ceteris paribus. The current
universal basic pension (GEL 150 per month) is major source of income for the poor (and even
the upper deciles). Reforms aimed at development of a new and relevant pension system will
improve social security and support capital markets development.
26.
An important part of the new Government’s plan is the expansion of health
coverage through the universal health care program for a package of health services.
Government funding of the health sector has been lower than in most ECA countries and thus the
doubling of budgetary allocations to the health sector between 2012 and 2013 and extending
coverage to the entire population is welcome. 8 The universal health care program is set to add
over 2 million persons to the approximately 1.7 million already covered by other state-financed
health programs, but the implementation arrangements need to be strengthened. The
establishment of a Unified Insurance Fund would play the role of a single payer, effectively
moving away from the current reliance on private insurers to purchase publicly funded health
services. 9 The new institutional structure is not yet implemented. In addition to the expansion of
coverage, there is need for a range of policy actions on quality of care, financial management and
pharmaceuticals (e.g. introduction of reference pricing and distribution controls, generic
substitution, and patient education).
27.
Significant efforts are needed to improve the overall quality of the education sector.
Systemic quality improvements in priority areas are needed: early childhood education (ECD);
general education; and tertiary education. Pending priorities for public policy include the need to
clarify the roles of different government agencies, set up standards and quality assurance
systems, strengthen local government, and improve capacity for service delivery and service
provision.
28.
A new law guaranteeing free provision of universal pre-school education supports
the goal of inclusion. Evidence shows that early childhood development is a rare public policy
with no equity-efficiency trade-off as it promotes social justice and fairness by raising the
productivity of society. 10 In Georgia, there would be several positive impacts of pre-school
education: (i) more women could participate in the labor market if their children were in preschool; (ii) attending at least one year of pre-school has a positive effect on academic
achievement throughout the student’s lifetime; and (iii) access to pre-school is currently
inequitable: enrolment rates in pre-schools for the richest and poorest quintiles are 55.7 percent
8

The “Life in Transition Survey” (2010) showed that health was the population’s top priority for Government spending
The objective to provide some universal health benefits for the entire population is in line with the recommendations in the
World Health Report 2010 “Health Systems Financing: the Path to Universal Coverage”.
10
The recent ECA jobs report “Back to Work” highlights the importance of improving early childhood development policies and
the quality of pre-schools for the development of non-cognitive and “soft” skills, critical for functioning in the modern global
economy.
9

11

and 30.5 percent respectively. However, the institutional arrangements must be defined to ensure
access and support quality. The concern is that making public pre-school education free of
charge may result in higher coverage but it is not likely to enhance the quality of the service
without significant institutional mobilization. Leveraging private resources to broaden further
the coverage of ECD services for children aged 0-2 years will also be critical.
Challenge: Enable Private Sector-led Job Creation through Improved Competitiveness
29.
Strengthening competitiveness and supporting labor reallocation to new, higher
value-added sectors will help Georgia create more and better jobs, essential for sustainable
poverty reduction and growth. Reducing Georgia’s unemployment will call for policies that
support labor mobility across sectors and facilitate the functioning of the labor market. In
particular, actions will be needed to support labor demand through strengthened firm
productivity and to ensure a supply of workers with the relevant skills through investment in
human capital.
30.
There is a significant pending reform agenda in the financial sector and capital
markets. Lending remained concentrated in loans to trade companies, households, and real
estate, with insufficient financing to agriculture, manufacturing and SMEs over the past decade.
2013 saw an increase in agriculture lending mainly due to a subsidized credit scheme. However,
the overall pace of lending slowed in 2013, with outstanding loans to manufacturing and
construction recording negative growth in spite of the fall in the NBG’s policy rate and a
significant injection of local currency liquidity into the domestic banking sector. The share of
non-performing loans (NPLs) declined to 7.5 percent in 2013 from 17.9 percent in 2009, though
the preponderance of foreign currency loans is a risk. Banking profitability improved recently
though high interest rates and collateral requirements have lowered the appetite for borrowing,
creating a challenge for banks’ future growth and profitability. Local currency lending to the real
sector, especially for medium to longer term investments remains insignificant.
31.
Increasing access to finance, especially for small and medium size enterprises
(SMEs) remains a priority. The SME sector represents nearly 96 percent of registered
businesses and employs 42 percent of workforce, but accounts for only 17.7 percent of business
turnover in 2013. Firms cite high interest rates, risk-averse lending policies with high collateral,
and absence of venture capital as major constraints to growth. SMEs currently rely on own
resources or on retained earnings for investment. Poor development of securities and capital
markets, limited local currency and long-term financial instruments, and reliance on a fully
publicly funded pension scheme, are hindrances to increasing the savings rate. The limited
options of non-bank credit institutions and instruments, as well as weak financial and business
illiteracy, hinder the financial access of micro and small firms. Georgia is the only country in
ECA without an explicit statutory deposits insurance system, fundamental for enhancing trust in
the financial sector and encouraging savings – a pre-requisite for strengthening financial access.
32.
Export competitiveness needs to improve. The share of exports in GDP was only about
38 percent in 2012 in Georgia, compared with over 90 percent in Estonia and the Slovak
Republic, 78 percent in Lithuania, and 59 percent in Latvia. While there has been growth in
exports in absolute terms, an analysis of the composition and dynamics of the export basket
reveals significant weaknesses: (i) loss of market share in key markets and products; (ii) stagnant
and low product sophistication and quality for its level of development; (iii) lack of product

12

diversification with scrap metal, re-export of used cars, wine and processed food, water and
tourism dominating; and (iv) low survival of export firms.
33.
Development of new firms and export lines in high value addition sectors is
hampered by the lack of a skilled workforce, low R&D spending, and limited use of
innovation and technology. There is need for diversified tertiary education and training,
especially in the technical and vocational areas. The role of the private sector in shaping
curricula and programs and providing training must be strengthened to ensure the workforce has
relevant skills. The Government needs to develop an institutional framework to facilitate
innovation and scale up of the most productive and innovative SMEs. Currently there is limited
use of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) in industry (Georgia’s ranking is 73
out of 142 on the World Economic Forum’s Global Innovation Index) and there is a lack of
understanding in the private sector of how ICT can make businesses internationally competitive.
34.
The Government has committed to addressing pending gaps in the business
environment. While Georgia has done well on the Doing Business index, there is a pending
reform agenda. This is mainly focused on the need for property and intellectual property rights
protection and enforcement, improved land titling and collateral registration, establishment and
enforcement of a competition framework aligned with international standards, and facilitating
access of MSMEs to markets and information.
35.
Active policy efforts are needed to facilitate effective functioning of the labor market
and formal work force participation, especially for women. Currently only a third of the labor
force is in the formal wage sector and active labor market policies will help increase this share.
This includes attention to the urgent need for better data and information on labor movements in
and out of employment and across different types of jobs to both inform policy design and
monitor impacts of interventions. Women are more likely to be employed in the informal sector
and will require more policy support to secure stable and formal sector employment.
36.
Improving agricultural productivity and facilitating the movement of labor from
agriculture into higher productivity activities are essential for strengthening economic
opportunities in rural areas. Subsistence agriculture accounts for 75 percent of rural
employment and 45 percent of rural income. The low productivity level is driven by low
investment, and low farmer participation in credit, input and output markets. Improving
agricultural productivity is essential for a competitive agri-business sector. The welfare of a large
share of population depends on agriculture becoming more productive. The Government is
increasing public funding to agriculture, either through specific funds (to promote private sector
participation) or subsidies to small-holder farmers. Such a level of public support through
subsidies generates risks, which can be mitigated by strengthening targeting at small-holder
farmers and containing and fiscal risks through the establishment of a transparent sunset clause.
37.
High rural poverty and significant regional disparities along most socio-economic
indicators suggest that investment in regional development is critical to increasing
inclusion. Georgia has adopted a State Strategy for Regional Development to address persistent
regional disparities, focusing on developing the potential sources of growth in each region. The
development of the tourism sector, and related business opportunities and private investments, is
a priority in this context. International tourist arrivals have grown rapidly (more than 5 million
visitors in 2013, representing a 66 percent increase since 2011). Tourism and travel is therefore
one of the fastest growing sectors in Georgia and a key generator of jobs, accounting for 14.2
13

percent of total employment in 2013 and 16 percent of GDP (directly and indirectly), and
forecast to continue growing by 4.8 percent per annum. The sector currently provides nearly 20
percent of export earnings. A national tourism development strategy is now needed to determine
how to improve the sector’s performance, align implementation priorities and enable job growth.
38.
Public policies to protect the environment and natural resources are not at par with
the impressive economic growth. In recent years, there has been extensive environmental
deregulation, exacerbating existing problems and resulting in unsustainable use of natural
resources and environmental damage. Several areas need priority attention: air and water quality,
waste management, land and landscape management, coastal and marine protection, chemicals
management, and nature resources use and protection. Georgia is considered amongst the most
vulnerable countries to climate change in ECA. It needs to strengthen institutions and increase
capacity to assess and manage environmental and disaster risks and impacts, particularly in light
of increasing occurrence and intensity of flash floods, strong winds, storms, etc.
39.
Georgia is highly exposed to several natural hazards and needs to strengthen
disaster preparedness. Over the past thirty years, major disasters such as droughts, storms,
floods, and earthquakes have hit Georgia. The 1987 floods destroyed 2,600 buildings, resulting
in US$300 million in damages. The drought in 2000 impacted 696,000 people causing US$200
million in damages. The earthquake that hit Tbilisi in 2002 caused damages estimated at US$350
million with more than 100 buildings damaged. Studies have shown that these disasters can
cause economic losses exceeding more than 9% of GDP. Georgia needs to increase its capacity
to manage the increasing occurrence and intensity of such disasters. New institutions with
appropriate capacity are required to manage disaster risks and to develop preparedness plans and
early warning systems.
II. GOVERNMENT SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
40.
Georgia’s medium-term development vision is articulated in the Socioeconomic
Development Strategy 2020 (SDS). The overarching objective of the SDS is to achieve faster,
inclusive, and sustainable growth averaging 7 percent p.a.. This assumes that structural reforms
will support rapid growth in investment, employment, and firm productivity and also ensure the
realization of potential benefits associated with the DCFTA in terms of higher exports and FDI.
The SDS plans to help the private sector develop into the engine of growth and, at the same time,
emphasizes the redefined role for the state to facilitate inclusion through better delivery of public
services, addressing market failures and cross-cutting constraints. The SDS intends to establish
an evidence based policy framework, supported by monitoring and evaluation mechanisms, to
ensure that policy interventions are relevant, have impact, and enable course correction.
Box 2: Pillars of the Socio-Economic Development Strategy (SDS)
Pillar 1: Establishing the pre-conditions for growth in terms of a stable macroeconomic environment, effective
public sector management, and fiscal efficiency and responsibility; (i) Inflation and exchange rate stability; (ii)
Creating and maintaining fiscal space through medium term expenditure and debt management frameworks,
pension reform, and prioritizing spending based on results and effective M & E; (iii) Effective public sector
management; and (iv) External sustainability through sound macro-prudential regulation, policies to bolster
savings, and actions to strengthen systemic credibility and support de-dollarization.

14

Pillar 2: Strengthening human capital - health, education, and social safety nets; (i) Ensuring 100 percent preschool enrollment; currently only 46 percent of children attend kindergarten; (ii) Supporting an effective VET
system, responsive to private sector needs; (iii) Improving the quality of the education system overall; (iv)
Improving labor market information and ensuring coordination with the TSA program; (v) Tightening the social
safety net through improved targeting to ensure expanded coverage to the bottom decile, and pension reform; (vi)
Establishing an effective system of universal health coverage. The SDS highlights the need for reforms aimed at
ensuring a supply of cost effective pharmaceuticals, and also prioritizes improved primary and preventive care.
Pillar 3: Improving private sector competitiveness by building on past successes and further enhancing the
investment climate, especially for SMEs, and focusing on firm productivity; (i) Moving from deregulation to smart
regulation to fill gaps in the existing business environment (competition policy, strengthened legal enforcement of
property rights including intellectual property rights, updated investment legislation, improved bankruptcy
procedures, and more effective dispute resolution); (ii) Establishing a National Development Council (NDC) to
support public-private consultation and implementation of the strategy; (iii) Promoting exports by leveraging the
DCFTA to support market access, and realizing Georgia’s potential as a regional logistics and transit hub and on
increasing productivity and exports in the agriculture sector; (iv) Strengthening innovation capacity through
financial support and a well-defined framework for collaboration between the private sector, research, and the
Government; and (v) Leveraging Georgia’s locational advantage and renewable resource potential to both meet its
growing energy needs of the services sector and develop electricity exports as a source of revenues.
Pillar 4: Increasing access to finance; (i) Promoting retirement savings, local currency financing instruments,
accessible financing for smaller firms, deposit insurance, and macro-prudential credibility; (ii) Strengthening
financial architecture through developing capital markets, non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs), and
improvement of financial market infrastructure, includes development of an appropriate legal and institutional
framework for credit information sharing and the establishment of a centralized collateral agency; and (iii)
Expanding access to finance for SMEs, start-ups and for agriculture.

III. WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM
A.

Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback

41.
The CPS Completion Report (CR) highlighted the importance of maintaining
balance in the program between stimulating growth and supporting poverty reduction
through the social protection system. The CPS CR concluded that poverty reduction
achievements in the latter part of the previous CPS period (from 2011 onwards) were mainly
brought about by an improved social protection system (pensions and TSA) that allowed for
increased transfers to the poor. Through its Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA) and the
Development Policy Operation (DPO) series, the WBG program had contributed to the design
and implementation of the TSA while, at the same time, carried out rigorous poverty analysis to
evaluate impacts. In parallel, the WBG program continued to focus on the growth agenda
through identifying constraints to private sector-led growth and through investing in
strengthening infrastructure and services for competitiveness.
42.
Analytical work remained essential to the program, providing the underpinning for
DPO-supported reforms and complementarity to lending. The AAA helped in understanding
growth dynamics, poverty, and public sector performance, and played a key role in proposing
development solutions and informing the Government’s SDS. For example, the FY12 Public
Expenditure Review, together with a series of Poverty Assessments, provided knowledge on
understanding how out-of-pocket expenditures in health care were impacting poverty, which in
turn has informed the Government’s program on universal health insurance. The AAA program
15

was aligned with lending, whereby key analysis nourished the design of operations and helped
prioritize reforms and engagements. The CPS CR recommended continued focus on analytical
work. The 2013 Country Survey highly rated the Bank’s analytical work and capacity building
activities, considering them essential to policy formulation and implementation (Box 4).
43.
The selectivity and complementarity between IBRD, IFC and MIGA has been
effective. The CPS CR concluded that WBG funding was channeled to maximize comparative
advantage, technical knowledge, and complementarities. The selectivity in the Bank’s program
allowed for an approach that balanced concerted focus on strengthening the effectiveness of
public expenditure and administration through AAA and DPO policy reforms, together with
targeting specific investments in infrastructure and regional development programs. This
complemented IFC support, which continued to focus on strengthening the financial system and
supporting enterprises in agribusiness, as well as MIGA’s engagement in the financial sector.
More recently, the energy sector has become an area of concerted joint WBG focus, which will
be consolidated in the program going forward.
Box 3: Key Results of the Georgia Country Survey (Spring 2013)
11

Stakeholders reported high levels of optimism about the country’s development path and believed that shared
prosperity would be achieved through raising the middle class and providing better opportunities for entrepreneurs,
and training to increase employment. Education and economic growth remained the top development priorities
(same since FY05). In addition, job creation/employment and agriculture/rural development emerge as critically
important for reducing poverty. FDI and private sector development were considered as key drivers for growth.
Respondents across all stakeholder groups saw an important role for the Bank in Georgia’s future development. As
had been reported in past country surveys (FY03 and FY05), stakeholders reported that education is the most
important area in which the Bank should focus its support (financial resources and knowledge work). Respondents
believe that the Bank should be also involved in private sector development, agriculture/rural development, transport
infrastructure, public sector governance and overall economic growth. The vast majority of stakeholders consider
financial resources (both investment projects and policy based lending) as the greatest value brought to the country
by the Bank. More than a quarter of respondents consult the Bank’s knowledge work on a regular basis.
Stakeholders consider the Bank’s knowledge work of high technical quality, and its content is rated high in terms of
relevance, feasibility of recommendations, accessibility, usefulness, and program implementation support.

44.
Program selectivity has been a strong feature of the program, facilitated by donor
coordination. The program was selectively focused on one DPO series that channeled reform
measures, complimented by support from other donors particularly in the social sectors (EU,
MCA in education, USAID in health, see Annex) The investment lending portfolio included
projects in infrastructure and regional development programs, whereby selectivity was facilitated
by the availability of funds from other donors, e.g., the ADB has taken the lead in the water
sector, while the EU and FAO have concentrated efforts in agriculture and rural development.
The WBG has taken the lead in transport, and in municipal and regional infrastructure, with an
increasing focus on the energy sector to complement policy actions and IFC investments.
Selectivity and donor coordination will remain a key feature of the WBG program and will be
further strengthened.

11

In April and May 2013, 276 stakeholders of the World Bank in Georgia were invited to provide their opinions on the Bank’s
assistance to the country by participating in a country survey. Two country surveys were conducted in Georgia in the past (in
FY03 and FY05) and allow for some comparisons.

16

45.
The CPS CR underlines the importance of continued capacity building in the public
administration with more effective monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The focus in the
portfolio on infrastructure has built up good implementation capacity as shown by the strong
portfolio performance and disbursement rates: this supports sustainability and provides a good
foundation for future support. The AAA program analyses public sector issues and identification
of capacity constraints, especially cross-sectoral coordination. The CPS CR concluded that there
is a need to support more effective M&E and impact assessments, including improving the way
results are monitored. More rigorous impact evaluations should be carried out to measure
contributions to poverty reduction, and to influence the design of future projects.
B. Portfolio overview and key features
46.
The portfolio has good implementation performance and satisfactory achievement
of results. The disbursement ratio was consistently high (113 percent in FY10, 54 percent in
FY11, 98 percent in FY12, and 49 percent in FY13) and teams are taking actions in this FY to
address slow-downs in project implementation linked to the transition with the new Government.
All projects have been rated Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory by IEG since FY11. Factors
contributing to success include high-level commitment to the CPS program, through joint design
and implementation, strong implementing agency capacity, and a decentralized WBG team,
allowing timely resolution of issues. IFC’s portfolio also confirms low levels of non-performing
loans (3.7 percent of total outstanding portfolio, or 5.9 percent of total loans), realized net equity
gains of US$12.1 million and unrealized gains on equity investments of US$92.3 million.
47.
The current IDA/IBRD program has one DPO and a selective investment portfolio
in roads, municipal infrastructure and regional development, amounting to US$600 million
in net commitments. The CPS is, thus, building on a program that balances the pursuit of
reforms through the DPO series, while selectively targeting critical infrastructure investments in
key areas. Both AAA and Trust Fund programs (amounting to about $11.5 million) are fully
aligned and complementary to the CPS and provide the strategic knowledge and capacity
building necessary for programmatic and policy-level engagements. They include sub-regional
AAA covering the South Caucasus that focus on shared regional issues and opportunities.
48.
The IFC program comprises investment and advisory operations. The committed
investment portfolio of US$291 million in 28 projects with 15 clients makes it IFC’s largest IDA
country exposure in ECA. Equity investments account for nearly 30 percent of the current
portfolio, well above IFC’s average in ECA. IFC operations in the financial sector (65 percent of
current exposure) include provision of long-term finance, trade finance lines, and risk
management investment products. The investment and advisory support helps banks expand onlending to SMEs, manage interest rate and currency risks, as well as improve portfolio
management practices and corporate governance. IFC is also engaged in the development of
housing finance, sustainable energy finance, and under-served markets like female entrepreneurs
and micro-finance. In the real sectors, IFC maintains its focus on agribusiness and prioritizes
investments and attracting FDI into renewable energy. The advisory programs help support
private sector investment by improving the business environment, helping introduce food safety
standards, and exploring opportunities for PPPS primarily in infrastructure, closely coordinated
with the Bank program. Furthermore, MIGA has three active projects in the financial sector with
a total gross exposure of $24.3 million and its full menu of product lines is available for Georgia.
17

C.

Proposed World Bank Group Support

49.
The WBG’s objectives during the CPS period in Georgia are to end extreme poverty
and boost shared prosperity. These objectives are the same as the WBG’s twin goals and are
also fully aligned with the priorities outlined in the Government’s SDS. To achieve these
objectives in Georgia, two strategic areas of focus have been identified for the CPS:
(i) Strengthening public service delivery to promote inclusive growth: the goal is to
accompany the Government in its commitment to increasing budgetary resources for
social sector programs in a fiscally sustainable way. This area of focus supports
improving the effectiveness and efficiency in the delivery of public services where there
is a known link to reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity;
(ii) Enabling private sector-led job creation through improved competitiveness: the goal is
to support a sustainable growth pattern that generates employment and provides income
opportunities for the bottom 40 percent of the population. The private sector will be the
driver of employment creation. The CPS contribution focuses on removing important
constraints in finance, infrastructure, technology and skills that prevent the private sector
from thriving. In addition, the CPS program is geared to empower the country to take full
advantage of opportunities available for growth. Georgia’s strategic location must be
maximized through continued development of road and energy infrastructure that will
facilitate private sector production and exports, integrate the country more effectively in
the region and set the longer term foundations for sustainable growth.
TWIN GOALS
Ending Extreme Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity

LINE OF SIGHT
To improve the effectiveness of specific public
sector programs in a fiscally sustainable way so as
to ensure that the poorest are targeted, more people
are benefiting and impact is greater.

LINE OF SIGHT
To enable the private sector to be the engine of job
creation through strengthening further economic
competitiveness thus bringing about more exportdriven and higher performing enterprises.

CPS PILLAR 1

CPS PILLAR 2

Strengthening public service delivery to
promote inclusive growth

Enabling private sector-led job
creation through improved
competitiveness

SDS PILLAR 1
Stable Macro-Economic
Environment/Fiscal
Efficiency

SDS PILLAR 2
Strengthened Human
Capital

18

SDS PILLAR 3
Increased Access to
Capital

SDS PILLAR 4
Improved Private
Sector
Competitiveness

50.
Within these two areas of focus, the following selectivity criteria were applied to the
choice of specific engagement areas:
(i) The CPS engagement areas reflect ownership as they are where the Government has
specifically asked for WBG support taking into account the WBG’s value-added and
support from other development partners. 12 The design creates synergies between the
WBG intervention and the Government’s programs and complements the programs of
other donors.
(ii) The engagement areas rank high as potential drivers of poverty reduction and inclusion,
as identified in the analysis of Georgia’s development challenges.
(iii) The program going forward builds on the successful elements of the existing program
where the WBG has a good track record on implementation: stepped up support will be
provided to consolidate areas where good development results have been achieved and
strong capacity is in place to absorb additional resources effectively.
(iv) The program allows for the WBG’s global knowledge to play a critical role as regards
how to target and implement programs effectively, drawing from best practices in ECA
and elsewhere where it has helped address similar challenges.
(v) Finally, the CPS program selectively targets areas where the WBG can achieve
measurable results during the strategy period while setting the institutional foundations
to allow Georgia to pursue its vision over the medium to long-term.
CPS Area of Focus 1: Strengthening public service delivery to promote inclusive growth
51.
This area of focus supports improving the effectiveness and efficiency of public
service delivery where there is a known link to reducing poverty and promoting inclusive
growth. The relevance of the CPS supporting public service delivery is magnified by the new
Government’s own commitment to increasing budgetary allocations to poverty reduction and
social sectors. However, a fiscally sustainable framework is necessary to ensure success: in such
a context, improvements in the provision of services – especially social services – will have to be
achieved largely through efficiency gains, by improving administration and targeting. This
requires significant support in the form of policy coordination, implementation support to
enhance capacity for service delivery, and effective monitoring and evaluation. The program also
aims to develop greater gender focus through monitoring of female beneficiaries of public
services and other gender data. These are all areas where the WBG’s program is currently active
and where it can bring further value added.
52.
The Government has requested that the WBG financial support in this area of focus
comes through Development Policy Operations (DPO). This will allow for strengthening of
Government’s own systems, with a focus on improving efficiency and capacity to deliver results.
The DPOs would also complement the investment financing being provided in the education and
health sectors by other donors such as the EU, USAID, MCC and others. In parallel to the
DPOs, the WBG will continue the successful approach of delivering jointly with the Government
a broad AAA program that will under-pin the design and delivery of the DPO series as well as
inform policy choice and institutional strengthening measures. The WBG will adapt the DPO
instrument to fit the emphasis on effectiveness and mobilize resources for technical assistance.
12

Annex 3 provides specific details on other donor programs

19

WBG INSTRUMENTS
IDA & IBRD Lending: DPO-3 (on-going series, FY14) and new DPO series for CPS Area 1 (FY15-16-17)
AAA: Programmatic poverty analysis (FY14-17), Country Gender Assessment (FY14), Public Expenditure
Reviews (FY14-17), Programmatic TA for social protection, health, education and public sector management
(FY14-17), TA on Public Private Partnerships (FY14-15), Report on Standards and Codes (ROSC, FY14-15),
PEFA (FY15), Urban Strategy (FY14), Country Environmental Assessment (FY15),
Trust Funds: Global Partnership for Social Accountability, Institutional Development Funds (IDF)

Supporting a more inclusive public expenditure
53.
The social protection system (TSA and pensions) is expanded and strengthened to
support the poor. The target under the CPS is to expand and strengthen the performance of the
TSA so that it can benefit a greater share of the poor; currently, the TSA supports around half of
the bottom decile, which calls for a need to broaden the coverage. The CPS will also target
strengthening of the basic pension system to be more effective in reaching its intended
beneficiaries and be anchored on a more sustainable path. The contribution of the CPS to these
goals will come through: (i) the AAA program that includes annual programmatic analysis of
poverty (including vulnerable groups); a Country Gender Assessment with analysis of gender
issues and indicators; diagnosis of implementation and impact issues of the TSA program,
including gender dis-aggregated data; supporting the pension reforms particularly to develop a
reform roadmap; and evaluating fiscal implications through regular PERs and policy dialogue in
collaboration with the IMF. The WBG is coordinating its technical support to the TSA through
partnering with UNICEF, EU, USAID and Sweden; and (ii) a DPO series that accompanies the
implementation of reforms, builds institutional capacity and puts in place better accountability
mechanisms, including a role for citizen engagement and feedback.
54.
The universal health care (UHC) program is expanded and health service quality
assurance processes are institutionalized. The Government’s introduction of the universal
health care program provides an opportunity to expand coverage and reduce out-of-pocket
expenditures. The cost implications of the UHC, however, need to be carefully analyzed to
ensure fiscal sustainability and improved efficiency in service delivery. The CPS will support the
UHC implementation through the DPO series, in parallel with a programmatic TA to assess and
review implementation progress and results, including female registration in the UHC. These
assessments can focus on technical areas and help identify corrective measures if necessary. The
program will also support the institutionalization of a health service quality assurance through an
assessment of the current system, identifying institutional gaps and providing options going
forward. Furthermore, the Bank’s overall work on procurement will look at possible reform
options for improving procurement in the pharmaceutical sector. IFC is ready to support private
sector participation in the health sector by investing in private sector providers. Investment
financing for specific health projects is available from other donors – such as USAID, EU and
UN agencies. The Government has thus requested the WBG to focus on policy formulation and
capacity strengthening for implementation through DPOs and TA.
55.
Essential knowledge base for general education and pre-school education is
established. The current WBG engagement in education is through the on-going DPO series and
through TA, which is also supported by an IDF grant focusing on developing methodologies and
20

instruments for evaluating teaching effectiveness. Going forward, support to education quality
improvement will ramp up the focus on comprehensive diagnostics on education quality issues,
and institutionalizing an M&E system for quality assurance. This knowledge base is essential to
guide further investment in the sector by the Government and other development partners.
Notably, partners such as MCC,13 USAID and EU have important investments in education and,
consequently, the Government has requested the WBG’s support to complement this through
knowledge and policy advice. As regards the provision of free pre-school education, its
successful implementation will significantly contribute to narrowing the learning outcome gap of
disadvantaged children, as well as providing opportunities for increasing female labor force
participation. Together with UNICEF, the CPS will provide knowledge on the appropriate
institutional framework required and identify the capacity building needs for municipalities
(which are responsible for service delivery), as well as support a better evaluation framework for
assessing impact.
(i) Strengthening the effectiveness and accountability of the public administration
56.
The identification, prioritization and implementation of public investments improve.
The WBG will help strengthen the Government’s capacity, at the local and central levels, to
prioritize, procure, implement and monitor programs and projects, while ensuring their fiscal
sustainability. The CPS will support the Government in its management of the public investment
funds and State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs), especially their governance, accountability and
financing frameworks. 14 The program includes support on strengthening public procurement,
including improving the capacity of the Competition and State Procurement Agency, that would
result in increased competition in the procurement of Government projects and in the use of eprocurement. A Country Environmental Analysis (CEA) is currently underway with the
objective to further the integration of environmental and sustainability risks in development
projects with improved management of natural resources. A similar approach will be taken to
ensure social sustainability with support from the Global Partnership for Social Accountability
(GPSA). The Government is also looking to enhance its capacity for undertaking PPPs in order
to “crowd-in” sources of financing from the private sector. The WBG is providing TA to
support the preparation of a “road map” for building government capacity to legislate, select and
implement PPPs and to attract private capital to finance large infrastructure projects. MIGA is
exploring potential support through: (i) risk mitigation instruments to ensure robust PPP
transactions and to improve access to international private sector financing; and (ii) diverse
insurance coverage to mitigate non-commercial risks associated with Government commitments
to the private sector. The CPS support will be largely through AAA and the DPOs and will be
coordinated with significant capacity building financing that’s available from other partners USAID, EU, Sweden and Switzerland.
57.
The adoption of modern public sector and fiscal management systems is
consolidated. The WBG will support the Government’s adoption of improved programmatic
budgeting, including the intergovernmental fiscal relationship, strengthening the results focus in
13
The MCC “compact” was approved in July 2013 for $140 million, all targeted towards the education sector. It draws from the
Bank’s knowledge of the education sector, institutional engagement on past reforms and achievements and targeting of
investments.
14
This includes the Financial Oversight Study of the SOE which would help design reforms required to introduce modern
commercial, financial management principles and resolve systemic weaknesses in the current system

21

local government budgeting to facilitate more inclusive and effective governance, and ensuring
better public services across the municipalities. The follow-up Regional and Municipal
Infrastructure Development Project will support these objectives, while leveraging funds from
the Council of Europe Development Bank (CEB), Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC),
Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA), and coordinating with USAID, EU, KfW
and UNDP. The dialogue around the DPOs will remain active regarding fiscal and debt
management, public sector modernization and risk management. The program will also support
efforts to streamline and harmonize public sector accounting and reporting standards, support the
further strengthening of the public internal and external audit, public financial internal control
and oversight systems. The WBG will provide support through a range of AAA: PER, Urban
Strategy, PEFA, ROSC and other PFM tools.
58.
Pilot programs will test innovative mechanisms for participatory local development
and greater social accountability. Georgia is engaged in a process of decentralization that, to
be effective, requires building capacity at the local level where the mandate and responsibility
for social programs critical for inclusion would be transferred. Pilot programs are intended to
improve the capacity of local governments to incorporate local demand into planning and to
respond to users so that local institutions are held to account. This improved citizen engagement
in government decision making will be pursued through the regional and municipal development
projects and supported through the use of trust funds (GPSA) in youth inclusion and social
accountability.
CPS Area of Focus 2: Enabling private sector led job creation through improved competitiveness

59.
This area of focus aims to address the challenge of bringing about inclusive growth
in a more sustainable way through the private sector creating more jobs. The CPS program
focuses on removing the most important constraints that prevent the private sector from thriving
and thus constrain employment creation. These constraints pertain to weaknesses in the overall
competitiveness of the economy including the need to increase access to finance, support the
development of exports to exploit fully the potential benefits of the DCFTA, boost innovation
and skills and step up investment in regions both to address significant disparities in poverty
levels and to help the country make the transition from subsistence agriculture to more
sustainable livelihoods. At the same time, Georgia’s strategic location must be maximized
through continued development of road and energy infrastructure that will facilitate private
sector production and exports, integrate the country more effectively in the region and set the
longer term foundations for sustainable growth.
60.
The choice of instruments harnesses the synergies and maximizes the potential value
added of the whole WBG through a consolidated package of support. Selectivity is driven
by the targeting of certain priority areas and choice of instruments:
(i)

Given the breadth of the key legal, regulatory and institutional constraints in private and
financial sector development, a new DPO series will be developed specifically for this
second CPS area. This DPO series will be informed by the AAA program and will
complement investment by other donors.

(ii)

The selectivity in the IDA/IBRD investment lending builds on on-going engagements and
focuses mainly on the consolidation of results in roads, regional and municipal
development, which currently make up the on-going investment portfolio.
22

(iii) IFC’s program will continue to prioritize investment and advisory services that contribute
to financial intermediation and increased access to finance for MSMEs, promote
investment climate improvements, and support development of hydropower and
agribusiness, while seeking investment opportunities in other sectors and developing
related advisory services.
(iv) MIGA’s role would support transformative transactions in transport, regional
infrastructure and renewable energy as part of the WBG overall support.
WBG INSTRUMENTS
IBRD and IDA Lending: DPOs – CPS Area 2, new series (FY15-16-17), Regional and Municipal Infrastructure 2
(FY14), Secondary and Local Roads 3 (FY14, FY16), Irrigation and Land Market Development (FY14), Energy
Transmission Grid (FY14), Innovation and ICT (FY15), East-West Highway (FY16), Regional Development 3
(FY15), additional infrastructure operations would be considered for the outer years of the CPS (FY16 and 17).
IFC Investments and MIGA Guarantees: IFC outstanding and new equity investments, short and long term debt
finance, and risk management instruments to support clients in the financial sector (banks, micro-finance
organizations), infrastructure (e.g. energy generation and transmission, airports), agribusiness and food retail,
manufacturing and services sectors, MIGA Small Investment Program, MIGA support to potential PPPs
AAA: Energy AAA (FY14-15), Accounting and Auditing ROSC (FY14-15), TA on labor market information
(FY14-15-16), TA on Internally Displaced People (IDPs), Country Environmental Analysis (FY15), IFC Investment
Climate Project (FY14-16), IFC Regional Renewable Energy Advisory Program (new program), IFC SME Banking
Project (FY13-15), IFC Agribusiness Standards (FY14-16), IFC Resource Efficiency Advisory (FY10-16), IFC PPP
Transaction Advisory.
Trust Funds: Regional Financial Sector Development Advisory Facility, JSDF for local SMEs

(i) Addressing key legal, regulatory and institutional constraints for the private sector
61.
The legal, regulatory and institutional framework is strengthened to promote
private sector growth, foster access to finance and FDI in export-oriented sectors and
facilitate the integration of Georgia into the global economy. Georgia plans to introduce a
“second generation” of business environment reforms aimed at opening up opportunities for
SMEs, fostering entrepreneurship, and addressing entrenched market failures. The support will
come through a robust AAA program that identifies the reforms and actions needed, with a new
DPO series (FY15-16-17) prepared for this area of focus to support appropriate sequencing and
implementation. The engagement will be coordinated with donors active in these areas: ADB,
EBRD, EIB and EU. The program will support:
•

Establishment of the competitive environment. Ongoing Bank and IFC engagement in the
area of investment climate will continue to help create a level playing field for domestic and
international business entry to Georgia. Strengthening the Government’s capacity to address
competition and consumer protection concerns is fundamental to facilitating the entry of
SMEs, the main generator of employment in the economy. Key actions supported by the
WBG program will be the establishment of an independent Competition Agency, adoption of
regulations that ensure better application of State Aid rules, and improved governance
frameworks for State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs). The support also includes simplification of
SME entry to public procurement and strengthening enforcement of respective policies on
market dominance, both on-going areas of WBG combined support. The STAREP regional
program for Eastern Partnership countries—which emphasizes knowledge sharing, peer
23

learning and implementation support—will complement the ROSC (Accounting and
Auditing) in helping Georgia develop institutional capacity in corporate financial reporting, a
critical aspect of a well-functioning market economy and improved access to finance for
SMEs. Finally, it encompasses support on the improvement of tax transparency for both local
businesses and foreign investors and facilitation of cross border trade through the on-going
IFC Georgia Investment Climate Project, which will help further reduce the costs of doing
business and encourage greater foreign direct investment.
•

Reform of the regulatory framework and institutions for energy. The AAA and DPOs
will support the implementation of a transparent, fair and market-based institutional and
regulatory framework (including domestic pricing) and the design and implementation of a
strategic plan for investments, including a strategic environmental and social assessment of
the investment plans in the energy sector. IFC will complement these activities through a
new Regional Renewable Energy Advisory Program designed to help governments improve
the regulatory framework for renewables and support IFC and non-IFC projects through
provision of sectoral expertise, market assessments, product design and financial structuring.

•

The protection of property rights. While Georgia holds first place in the Doing Business
ranking (2014) for the ease of property registration, this achievement loses its importance if
the property is not secure and disputes concerning property ownership are not quickly
resolved. Similarly, Georgia has generally brought its intellectual property rights (IPR)
legislation into line with EU standards, however, enforcement remains weak and judges and
lawyers lack sufficient knowledge of IPR rules. Improvements are needed to catalyze
investments in knowledge-intensive sectors. The CPS aims to build the capacity of the state
to enforce property ownership rights and IPR by establishing more effective business dispute
resolution systems, enhancing the protection of investors and minority shareholders’
interests, and reducing IPR infringement.

62.
Access to finance expands, especially for firms in the SME sector. The CPS will
support the development of a more effective and inclusive financial sector (banking, non-bank
financial institutions - including pension and insurance- and capital markets) that will channel
savings into investment, diversify products and sources of alternative finance. This will improve
access to finance which, together with a more competitive environment, will encourage the
development of SMEs. A necessary step will be to carry out an FSAP update (jointly with the
IMF) that will identify challenges in more depth and set out a financial sector development
strategy and action plan that could then feed into the identification of priority policies that the
new DPO series can support. Other WBG activities include the Accounting and Auditing ROSC
and the use of Trust funds through the Regional FSD Advisory Facility.
63.
IFC will maintain its strong focus on the financial sector strengthening and
improving access to finance for MSMEs. It will continue to support banking sector
capitalization through equity investments and sub-ordinated loans. It will provide short-term and
long-term financing, guarantees, risk management instruments to financial intermediaries
helping them expand lending to MSMEs and farmers, and increase trade, housing and supplier
finance. IFC will also explore ways to improve local currency financing, provide advisory
services to develop knowledge and capacity in the banking sector to manage risks, promote
sustainable energy finance, and provide non-financial services to SMEs aiming to improve their
financial and business literacy. MIGA will continue to support its three active projects in the
financial sector and seek opportunities for expanding business.
24

64.
Policies to strengthen firms’ capacity to innovate and export are developed.
Implementing new programs to support innovative entrepreneurship and exporting capabilities
could contribute to the demand for high-skilled jobs. The CPS support will be through a
combination of AAA, policy dialogue and a specific investment lending operation (Innovation
and ICT Project, FY15, US$40 million) and will target the design and implementation of new
strategies and financing instruments to foster innovation, increase knowledge and technology
spillovers, and facilitate scale-up of the most innovative SMEs. The immediate goal is to create
appropriate institutional mechanisms at the ministerial and agency levels, including the
establishment of the Georgia Technology and Innovation Agency for innovation strategy, which
will provide services and programs that foster innovative culture and entrepreneurship, cofinance innovation investments by SMEs, foster technology adoption and R&D
commercialization, and support the development of export-oriented IT-enabled startups. An ICT
note has recently been finalized which has helped identify the CPS priorities for innovation and
skills, and further work is planned to assist in defining and implementing policies and programs
to position ICT as both a source and enabler of innovation and job creation in Georgia.
65.
The CPS will also support the design and implementation of policy initiatives,
investments and partnerships that integrate exporters into global supply chains and move
into high value-added segments. The program would aim to ensure that appropriate
institutional mechanisms are operating at the ministerial and agency levels, including the
establishment of the Georgia Enterprise and Export Promotion Agency along with an export and
entrepreneurship development strategy. The WBG attention to facilitating further international
trade will center on upgrading of the trade logistics platform and customs automation system, as
well as streamlining the rules for importing and exporting and assuring their effective
implementation. In harmony with the EU’s support to Georgia to meet the DCFTA food safety
standards, IFC will continue improving agri-business product quality and compliance with
international norms. Technical assistance will continue to be provided to those exporters aiming
to increase the quality of their products or reach new markets. To this end, IFC’s new regional
Agribusiness Standards Program (available for IFC clients in ECA) will support upgraded food
safety standards, as well as environmental and social standards and practices. To complement
these efforts, IFC will explore viable investment opportunities in agribusiness and food retail
targeting competitive and export oriented.
(ii) Providing Infrastructure and Services to Facilitate Growth
66.
Efforts at equipping the country with adequate infrastructure are consolidated. The
Bank’s current portfolio supports improvement of the quality and access to infrastructure at the
municipal, regional and national levels aiming to: (a) maximize the potential for Georgia to
participate in the global economy as an “inter-connectivity hub” for transport and energy; and (b)
impact people’s livelihoods through improving access to markets, reducing travel times and
costs, ensuring provision of reliable utilities, and facilitating access to services. The strength and
maturity of previous involvement of the WBG in infrastructure assures delivery and that
investments have been strategically selected to contribute to growth and inclusion. In addition,
new procurement practices will enhance competition in the selection of bidders.
67.
Georgia will enhance its regional position through increased potential of electricity
exports from renewable sources. The WBG will aim to create transformational change in the
energy sector through facilitating renewable energy production and overall regional interconnectivity with Turkey and Azerbaijan. The Bank will help in developing market rules,
25

network infrastructure and financial solutions to leverage private investment. The engagement
will focus on the implementation of international standards of strategic and site specific
environmental and social assessments to support development of sustainable hydropower
resources and help Georgia leverage its hydropower potential for domestic energy needs and as a
source of electricity export revenues. The World Bank will invest in enabling public
transmission lines, which will complement IFC and MIGA engagement with the private sector.
IFC will continue supporting Georgia to build up to 550 MW of new hydropower plants,
equivalent to an increase of about 20 percent of existing hydropower capacity. IFC’s
contribution will come through mobilizing financing (equity and debt investments as well as
significant mobilization from partners) and helping prepare concessions. MIGA will support
FDI in hydropower investment by providing the appropriate risk insurance.
68.
Georgia emerges as an “inter-connectivity hub” for transport. The CPS will support
efforts to take advantage of the strategic position of Georgia in the region. The WBG will
continue to coordinate with the Government and other development partners (ADB, EIB, JICA
etc.) on the strategic prioritization of investments in the East-West Highway to ensure maximum
mobilization of resources and to further strengthen the institutional capacity. As sections of the
East-West Highway are completed, and an asset management system is implemented, the Bank,
IFC and MIGA will explore with Government the possibility of PPPs for operation and
maintenance of those sections.
69.
The development of secondary and local roads targets the poverty disparities among
regions and provides a platform for the integration of the rural economy. These roads lead
to the reduction of costs to access markets and services, broaden the reach to the poor and
isolated regions and create direct employment in the execution of civil works. WBG support will
continue with a follow-up Secondary and Local Roads project (FY14 and possible additional
finance in FY16). Financing road improvements in these lagging regions with high agriculture
potential could directly benefit farmers by increasing farm gate prices thereby expanding access
to markets. 15 The Project will also pilot labor intensive methods to execute routine maintenance
works of local roads. If successful, this could provide direct long term employment by scaling up
the execution of routine maintenance interventions using micro-enterprise schemes for a large
part of the local road network.
70.
Greater connectivity within the domestic market helps incorporate the contribution
of different regions and address poverty disparities between regions. The WBG is preparing
a follow-up third Regional Development project to contribute to the implementation of regional
strategies issued by local authorities, address regional disparities, support competitive sectors in
regions and attract private sector to locate in the regions. Improved access to services and
strengthening regional inter-connectivity are also focus areas of this project. Trust fund
financing through the JSDF has been mobilized to support local micro and small businesses –
especially women – to develop and grow. Continuation of a complementary AAA program,
carried out jointly by the Bank, IFC and MIGA is supporting preparation of a national tourism
strategy and investment promotion plan.

15

A very useful assessment of community level impact of rural roads on the poor in Georgia (1999-2001) indicates clearly that
road and bridge rehabilitation projects generated economic benefits at the community level (Lokshin and Yemtsov, 2005).

26

71.
Strengthened agricultural productivity to improve competitiveness. While better
rural and local roads facilitate access to markets for rural producers, more is needed to drive the
increases in productivity necessary for agricultural products to compete in national and
international markets. To date, the EU and USAID have been the main partners to the
Government on agriculture and rural development and they will continue to lead donor
engagement in these areas. The Bank's involvement will complement their activities by focusing
on a pilot project for the rehabilitation and upgrading of existing irrigation infrastructure, with
the goal of enhancing agricultural productivity. The Irrigation and Land Market Development
Project will develop a national irrigation strategy and improve infrastructure on about 28,000 ha.
In addition, the project supports the unfinished land reform agenda by completing the surveying,
certification and registration of land, including agricultural land, state land, pastures and forests.
The Bank will also carry out AAA on linking smallholder farmers to markets and on public
expenditures in agriculture. The formulation of the National Land Reform Strategy and Action
Plan, supported by the planned project, will also consider how to enhance the land rights of IDPs
and women. To complement this, IFC will target MSMEs in rural areas through the provision of
financing to financial intermediaries and through investment and advisory services in
agribusiness along its value chain. MIGA’s Small Investment Program, that offers political risk
insurance for smaller and medium-sized investment, would also look at potential in the agribusiness area.
72.
Ensuring AAA sets the knowledge base. The AAA program is analyzing specific
development issues that could be considered for further support in this CPS area of focus at the
mid-term point. The AAA is ramping up the focus on climate change issues with recent analytic
work completed, 16 a Country Environmental Analysis underway and future AAA to encompass
green transportation and logistics, with the aid of a grant from the Korea Green Growth Trust
Fund. The latter aims to identify policies to reduce fossil fuel consumption and the negative
environmental impacts of transport and a likely output would be a national strategy for greening
freight transport and logistics, the identification of a capital investment program and technical
capacity building activities for both public and private actors. Strategic social, environmental and
cultural heritage assessments are being prepared in relation to the on-going Regional
Development Programs, and the follow-through on their recommendations and measures will be
incorporated into the implementation of the projects. The UN-CADRI is leading donor support
on disaster risk management, including natural hazards, and the CPS complements this by
engaging on disaster risk management through technical assistance to understand better the risks
of natural disasters and to strengthen disaster risk management in the country. This will help to
identify policies and measures needed to mitigate disaster risks.
(iii)

Improved framework for matching labor supply and demand

73.
The goal of the CPS here is two-fold: (i) to support better labor market information
and analysis that will allow for evidence-based policy; and (ii) develop more effective public
employment services. The CPS will support institutional capacity to collect and analyze more
and better data on labor market dynamics and then use this analysis to improve public policy
design and implementation. A good labor market information system could be linked to the
16

A recent AAA report was finalized “Developing Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation strategies in agriculture” which
assesses the potential impacts of climate change on the agricultural sector and identifies strategies for climate change adaptation
and mitigation measures to increase resilience of agricultural systems

27

SIMS, which plans to integrate pensions, TSA and labor market data into a single interface
enabling welfare-to-work schemes or other forms of work “activation”. This would help in
better understanding the dynamics of employment and labor market participation, such as why
women tend to self-select into jobs with lower returns rather than enter science, technology or
engineering fields. The Bank will facilitate knowledge on best practices in public employment
services, with a focus on matching unemployed with training programs, and improved social
dialogue, especially to include women and youth.
74.
Continued attention will be given to bringing IDPs into the labor market. IDPs face
special challenges in achieving sustainable livelihoods, improving their income and employment
status. They risk becoming dependent on social safety nets as their main form of income. The
Bank will continue to engage in TA to ensure that: (i) IDPs are integrated as a special target
group in overall economic development strategies; and (ii) the government builds capacity to
address the livelihood challenges of IDPs.
Box 4: Consultations with civil society, government and the private sector
A series of broad consultation meetings with civil society representatives took place in the period of November
2013-February 2014. These included meetings with local and international non-governmental organizations,
research institutions, foundations, youth groups, and the private sector. Separate meetings took place with thinktanks and with government officials. The meeting with private sector representatives was organized together with
IFC. A summary of the draft CPS document was circulated prior to the consultations to allow the participants to
prepare for the discussion of the proposed program by the World Bank Group. (Further details of the feedback from
these consultations is attached in Annex 4.)

D.

Implementing the Strategy

75.
Maximizing the Financial Envelope: Georgia is expected to graduate from IDA at the
end of the IDA16 Replenishment period and the remaining IDA allocation of US$70.8 million
will be fully used in FY14. This will complement the US$235 million in IBRD lending in FY14.
Thereafter, the Government has confirmed its interest to maximize IBRD borrowing and an
indicative envelope of about US$300 million per year is anticipated although the actual volume
of IBRD lending will depend on how program performance evolves in the course of the CPS
period and on IBRD’s lending capacity and demand from other borrowers. Indicative IBRD
allocations will be outlined during annual programing exercises with the Government.
76.
Subject to market demand and the availability of viable investments, IFC is
planning investments between US$250 and US$350 million with the goal of mobilizing
additional financing from the private sector and IFIs, including though PPPs. In addition to
ongoing financial sector support, IFC will aim to grow its real sector portfolio through
investments in sustainable energy, and will continue to seek opportunities to invest in
competitive manufacturing, agribusiness and services companies, particularly those with strong
links to the rural economy and SMEs.
77.
The WBG will continue to collaborate closely with donors and IFIs to bring about
greater harmonization in areas of engagement and to assure complementarity in

28

financing.17 Specific good practices on donor coordination that will be continued going forward
include:
(i) Implementation of infrastructure projects will continue to be shared with other partners.
This involves WBG leadership role with respect to overall transport sector policy and
road sector financing. For example, financing of specific road sections of the East-West
Highway is split among the main donors (WBG, ADB, EIB, JICA) and there is broad
sharing of successful experiences (such as piloting of performance based contracts) and
preparation of feasibility studies. This good experience from the transport sector is
being broadened to the regional development and energy sectors.
(ii) Broad dissemination of AAA to help inform other partners’ programs, particularly on
identification of reforms that could be covered by budget support from ADB and EU
(iii) Coordination with the IMF on the monitoring of macroeconomic developments,
technical assistance and policy dialogue on fiscal policy and public financial
management. The DPO series complement the IMF program, which emphasizes fiscal
consolidation within an agreed macroeconomic framework, with a focus on growthenhancing structural reforms.
78.
The current Trust Fund portfolio amounts to $11.5 million and complements the
CPS program. This includes $9.3 million from SIDA in support of wastewater management
(with further leveraging expected of $4-5 million from SDC to support decentralization), three
IDF grants (for Parliament, Tbilisi Municipality and Georgia’s National Education Examination
Center) and a Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building. The portfolio will soon be
complemented by (i) $3 million JSDF for the Regional Development project to support local
communities in Kakheti and Imereti to start and grow micro and small businesses, especially
those run by women; and (ii) a grant from the Global Partnership for Social Accountability that
will support pilots for participatory local development and greater social accountability. Georgia
will benefit from the European Neighborhood Partnership Initiative Forest Law Enforcement and
Governance (ENPI FLEG II) project, which supports good forest governance and sustainable
forest management in seven countries (total program is $11.2 million). The Austrian
Development Agency has recently agreed to support FLEG initiatives in Georgia and Armenia
for an additional US$2.16 million
E.

Results

79.
This CPS program will mainstream gender analysis, action and evaluation of
gender impact of results. The Bank’s AAA program will deliver a Country Gender
Assessment, as well as the study on the skewed sex ratio at birth, and continue analysis of gender
issues as part of the programmatic poverty work. In addition, the program will generate
knowledge on gender through supporting the collection and analysis of gender dis-aggregated
data in the areas of engagement. As regards the project portfolio, it will look at some of the
following: (a) incorporating mechanisms to ensure women’s participation in priority setting and
decision-making at the project level; (b) facilitating engagement with organizations (NGOs,
women’s groups) to enhance project gender sensitivity during preparation; (iii) ensuring gender
is encapsulated in the on-going portfolio and re-orienting if necessary; and (iv) ensuring project
17

Annex 3 provides details on financing by development partners in Georgia

29

employment opportunities translate into economic opportunities for women. This will be carried
out also in the broader context of promoting citizen engagement tools to promote inclusiveness,
outreach, and grievance mechanisms. The CPS commits pro-actively to monitoring progress
towards gender, introducing corrective measures and fine-tuning as new knowledge is gained.
80.
The WBG will aim to do more and better to understand the impact of interventions.
The challenge is to draw out the specific impacts of project level interventions on poverty
reduction outcomes, attribute them in a credible manner and understand the transmission
mechanisms of how benefits can reach the poor. The WBG’s AAA program on poverty is
already looking at links between poverty and economic growth and this will be broadened to
look at links with program interventions. Impact assessments, quantitative and qualitative
surveys will be used to measure improved access to services or opportunities. An important
evolution of the program going forward is the systematic impact evaluation of the road
investments to assess their contribution to poverty reduction and boosting shared prosperity. This
will include formulating methodologies to validate the expected impacts by providing
measurable impact assessments. Baseline Survey Reports were prepared for the on-going
Regional Development projects, Municipal Infrastructure Development project, and Secondary
and Local Roads project. These baseline surveys identify some of the major constraints faced by
the targeted population in accessing services and economic opportunities. Innovations in poverty
estimation methodologies (such as survey to survey imputations) and data collection tools (georeferencing, use of smart phones, etc.) will be explored to enable measurement of local area or
village level impacts. Gender disaggregated data and impacts will be embedded in this work.
81.
Performance and Learning Reviews. This CPS will adopt performance and learning
reviews to identify and capture lessons from implementation to determine mid-course
corrections, end-of-cycle learning and accountability, and to help build the WBG knowledge
base, including effective approaches for integrating inclusion and sustainability dimensions. The
program will look at innovations in implementation support to ensure full achievement of project
indicators. Sound data systems and analysis that permit real-time evidence, together with
improved citizen feedback, should allow for more robust evaluation and facilitate mid-term
policy and program correction.
IV. MANAGING RISKS
82.
The domestic political context could impact program performance. The risk exists
that policy uncertainty, that characterized 2013, returns and weakens the ability of the
Government to fulfill its election promises. This risk is somewhat mitigated by the stabilization
in the political context since the Presidential elections and the new Government has
demonstrated commitment in the SDS to developing a vision for inclusive growth and privatesector led job growth. While the WBG role in mitigating this risk is limited, the Government has
requested a broad partnership with the WBG in support of a transparent and effective public
policy environment that is inclusive and anchored in evidence-based decision making. Should
policy uncertainty arise that negatively impacts the implementation of the SDS, the WBG will
re-assess the CPS program at the mid-term point. Potential shifts in the strategy at that stage
could include decreasing DPO support and substituting investment operations instead.

30

83.
There are risks related to public sector capacity to deliver results, particularly in line
ministries and at the local government levels. Delivering on the ambitious goals in the social
sectors poses a challenge in terms of existing systems, standards, and capacity. Addressing these
challenges is at the core of the CPS focus on supporting the Government in “delivering for
impact” and requires a concerted focus on the identification of capacity gaps and coordinated
capacity building. These risks are also expected to be mitigated by capacity building support
from other donors, and by leveraging private resources through PPPs to support the provision of
accessible and high quality public services. Should the DPO instrument with the accompanying
TA support prove to be insufficient, the choice of instruments will be reviewed at the mid-way
point with other instruments being considered such as Program for Results or investment
operations specifically designed in support of social sector programs.
84.
Georgia faces risks from the external environment and regional context. Although
its strategic location between Europe and Asia is an opportunity for longer term growth, the
complicated geo-politics of the South Caucasus region pose risks and may contribute to the
difficulties in attracting private investment and growing jobs. While the relationship with Russia
has improved with the lifting of the trade embargo on wine and mineral water from Georgia, any
negative political developments between Georgia and Russia could cause greater instability in
the region. The frozen conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan also potentially poses a risk if
that situation were to deteriorate. The CPS will carefully monitor this external context and
mitigate the risk by pro-actively adapting the program as needed.
85.
Risks also exist to private sector capacity to grow, innovate and create jobs, mainly
stemming from limitations imposed by the current level of private sector and financial sector
development, gaps in public sector service provision, and other challenges on skills and labor
market issues. The CPS aims to mitigate this risk through a comprehensive package of support
on private sector and financial sector development, while recognizing that expectations for
radical change on the private sector’s role in Georgia should be modest within the CPS time
frame. The two-fold focus of the CPS on private sector-led inclusive growth and effective public
service delivery allows for balance in the approach, through focusing on both the public and
private sector roles in creating a conducive environment for equitable growth and job creation.
Further mitigation efforts include strong dialogue between the private and public sectors on
policy design, greater inclusion in governance and budgetary planning, strengthened role of
private sector institutions such as chambers of commerce and business associations, and efforts
to strengthen MSME capacity.
86.
Macroeconomic risks stem from high external debt, the dollarized financial system,
limited scope for monetary policy and fiscal pressures. The government’s commitment to
fiscal consolidation and efficient public financial management provides a strong framework for
the CPS and underscores the importance of pro-poor priority spending and investment planning
that is focused on results and development impact and aligned with strategic growth objectives.
Financial sector and capital markets reform, along with measures to strengthen the macroprudential framework will support gradual de-dollarization and strengthen the transmission
channels of monetary policy, thereby reducing the pressure for fiscal policy to react to even
temporary shocks. This will also support growth in national savings, essential for the current
account deficit to narrow to sustainable levels. External sustainability and macroeconomic
stability will also be supported through the Government’s commitment to exchange rate
flexibility and the maintenance of a responsible fiscal framework. Should the macro-economic
31

framework no longer be adequate and remedies are not implemented effectively, then the WBG
will consider adapting the program accordingly with a change of instrument, substituting
investment lending in the place of DPOs.

32

Annex 1: Georgia FY14-17 CPS Results Matrix
Country
Development
Goals (from
SDS)

Development Challenges and Opportunities addressed
by the CPS

CPS Engagement Areas and Outcome Indicators

World Bank Group Program

Area of Focus 1: Strengthening Public Service Delivery to Promote Inclusion and Equity
Improving the
Social
Assistance
System

While the Targeted Social Assistance (TSA) program is
well-designed, its coverage and efficiency need to be
improved , as currently less than half of the bottom income
decile is covered, and some leakages remain.
The pension system in Georgia provides universal basic old
age security to all elderly. Currently it lacks a firm
indexation rule that would allow the basic benefit to
maintain at least its purchasing power. In addition, a
savings system, whether mandatory or voluntary, would
provide adequate replacement of working age income.

Provision of
accessible and
high quality
healthcare

The Government’s Universal Health Coverage (UHC)
program started in 2013 aiming at equitable coverage of
health services, as well as financial risk protection.
However, reducing households’ out-of-pocket health
expenditure, which is among the highest in the region at
over 70 percent of total health spending, will need major
effort in pharmaceutical price regulation and refining UHC
benefit package based on evaluative and actuarial studies.
Improving quality of medical service delivery will remain
key challenges to succeed in improving health outcomes.

Improve quality
of education.

18

Access to general education has been expanded quite
successfully with gender parity, but the quality of education
remains a pressing challenge, reflected by the low

CPS Objective 1:
Expanded and strengthened social protection system
(TSA and pensions)
Outcome Indicators:
• TSA Coverage of the poorest decile by TSA increases
from 40 18 percent in 2012 to 60 percent in 2017; with
equitable coverage of men and women of the poorest
decile
Note: More detailed gender dis-aggregated data per
decile will be developed during the CPS period
• Pension reform roadmap developed

IDA/IBRD Lending:
DPO-3 (on-going, FY14)
New DPO (CPS Area 1, FY1516-17)

CPS Objective 2:
Expanded “universal health coverage (UHC)” program
and institutionalization of health service quality
assurance processes

AAA:
Pension reform (FY14-17)
TSA implementation and results
assessment TA (FY14-17)
South Caucasus Poverty, Equity
and Gender TA (FY14-17)
Country Gender Assessment
(FY14)
IDA/IBRD Lending:
DPO-3 (on-going, FY14)
New DPO (CPS Area 1, (FY1516-17)

Outcome Indicators:
• UHC registration rate from 60% of the target
population in July 2013 to 90% in 2017, with tracking
of female registration rate
Note: More detailed data on female registration and
utilization of UHC will be developed during the CPS
period

AAA:
UHC implementation and results
assessment TA (FY14-17)
Health service quality assurance
review (FY14-15)
Country Gender Assessment
(FY14)

CPS Objective 3:
Essential knowledge base for general education and preschool education elaborated

IDA/IBRD Lending:
DPO-3 (on-going, FY14)
New DPO (CPS Area 1, FY15-

This is the baseline from the current version of the Socio-Economic Development Strategy

33

achievement level in international student assessment along
with the unsatisfactory labor market outcomes of graduates.
Furthermore, the new “free pre-school” policy will pose key
implementation challenges in the near term. Its successful
implementation will significantly contribute to narrowing
the learning outcome gap of the children of disadvantaged
background. Access to pre-school education has also been
identified as a constraint to female labor force participation.

Effective Public
Administration
and
Decentralization.

While Georgia performs above average compared to middle
income countries with respect to basic requirements and
efficiency enhancing indicators of the World
Competitiveness Index, there is a need to improve
implementation and delivery of public services. Improving
implementation and delivering public services to citizens
more efficiently and with more accountability will require a
focus on building the necessary mechanisms and capacity
of Georgia’s public administration.
Decentralization and the leading role of sub-national units
in stimulating local economic processes are seen as very
important factors for achieving national development.
Continuing decentralization efforts will require a consistent
approach and careful design in ensuring efficiency and
effectiveness of public service delivery at the local
government level.

Outcome Indicators:
• School-based education quality monitoring database
established
• Teacher effectiveness evaluation tools developed &
adopted
• Institutional framework elaborated for early and preschool education service delivery and quality
assurance, including support to piloting of priority
interventions.
CPS Objective 4:
The identification, prioritization and implementation of
public investments improve
Outcome Indicators:
• Strengthened capital budgeting reflected in objective
and transparent selection criteria for 50 percent of new
projects in Tbilisi municipality (Baseline= zero).
• Increased number of published annual IFRS based
financial statements of SOEs with unqualified audit
opinion from 4 in 2013 to 8 in 2017
• Increased number of beneficiaries of improved
municipal services and infrastructure from 0 at
baseline to 2.4 million, of which 1.22 million females.
CPS Objective 5:
Sustained progress towards the adoption of modern
public sector and fiscal management systems
• Quality and timeliness of annual financial statements
(PEFA PI-25) Baseline: C+ Target: B; 2);
• Effectiveness of internal audit (PEFA PI-21):
Baseline: C+ Target: B)
CPS Objective 6:
Strengthening participatory local development and
greater social accountability
• New pilot mechanisms for citizen engagement and
feedback are put in place including (i) development of
new forum for youth to engage with local government
in the creation of joint action plans; and (ii) integrating

34

16-17)
AAA:
Education TA for
implementation of sector strategy
(FY14-17)
School survey, incl. assessment
of learning outcomes (FY14-15)
Pre-school service delivery and
quality assurance assessment
(FY14-15)
IDF Education (on-going)
IDA/IBRD Lending
New DPO(CPS Area 1, FY1516-17)
Regional and Municipal
Development Projects (FY09,
FY14)
AAA:
PER, programmatic (FY14-17)
Country Gender Assessment
(FY14)
PEFA (FY14-15)
CEM, programmatic (FY14-17)
Local Public Expenditure and
Financial Accountability
TA to support Govt.’s Public
Financial Management strategy
and strengthened SOE
governance (FY14-15)
Urban Strategy (FY15)
Country Environmental
Assessment (FY15)
Procurement TA support (FY1417)
Other:
Youth Inclusion and Social
Accountability Project (FY14,
Trust Funds)

tailored social accountability tools into water supply
and sanitation services and local roads rehabilitation.
• Increased citizen satisfaction with municipal service
provision and municipal response from 40% to 70%.

Area of Focus 2: Enabling job creation by the private sector through improving competitiveness
Improve
Georgia’s
investment and
business
environment,
including in the
regions.

The extensive regulatory and business environment reforms
implemented by Georgia so far have had modest impact on
its competitiveness. Despite a consistent policy in market
deregulation and liberalization, and high levels of FDI
before the 2008 international economic crisis, the economy
is still based on low technological sophistication, low levels
of innovation, with a dearth of skills. As a result, the growth
experienced over the past decade was not coupled with an
increase in export competitiveness.
Despite Georgia’s third ranking in the 2014 Doing Business
indicators in this regard, and its private credit registry that
already covers close to half of the existing firms, surveys,
businesses continue to cite access to finance as a key
constraint.

Improving
access to finance

Supporting
innovations and
development of
technologies,
including in the
regions.

According to BEEPS 2013 results, the percentage of firms
which developed new products in the past three years has
dropped from 35% in 2008 to 9% in 2013; over the same
period 2008-2013, percentage of firms that spent any funds
on R&D in the previous three years dropped from 16% to
4%.
Georgia needs to improve infrastructure services and
institutional capacity to support the development of
tourism, cultural heritage sites, and agribusiness in the
regions.

CPS Objective 7: Key legal, regulatory or institutional
constraints for the private sector are addressed, including
in the regions
Outcome Indicators:
(a) Stronger regulatory framework:
• Business environment and property rights protection
enhanced with Georgia’s ranking in economic freedom
(Heritage Foundation) improved from 34th position in
2012 and intellectual property rights enhanced from
129th position in 2013 (out of 130) as ranked by the
International Intellectual Property Rights Ranking
(b) Increased innovation capacity:
• R&D investments (private and public) increased from
0.1 percent of GDP in 2012
• Increased Georgia’s innovation index ranking from
73rd in 2013 (INSEAD-WIPO report)
Note: The next BEEPS survey will include the “gender
module” that has extra questions covering femaleheaded enterprises and allows for gender disaggregated data collection
(c ) Strengthening competition in key product markets
• Georgia’s intensity of local competition improved from
123rd (out of 142 in 2012) in the Global Innovation
Index
(d) Increased access to finance:
• Increased access by SMEs to bank financing with
share of loans to SMEs in banks’ loans increased from
20 percent (baseline 2013)
• Improved access of SMEs to more diversified products

35

IDA/IBRD Lending:
DPO-3 (ongoing, FY14)
Regional Development Projects
Regional and Municipal
Development Projects (FY09,
FY14)
New DPO (CPS Area 2, FY1516-17)
ICT/Innovation project (FY15)
AAA:
South Caucasus Poverty, Equity
and Gender TA (FY14-17)
ROSC (FY14-15)
CEM, Programmatic (FY14-17)
National Tourism Strategy
(FY15)
Urban Strategy (FY14)
FSAP (FY14-15)
Country Gender Assessment
(FY14)
IFC On-Going:
IFC financial markets
outstanding investment portfolio
comprised of 19 projects (incl. 14
targeting MSMEs) with 8 client
banks.
IFC agri-business investment
portfolio comprised of 2 projects.
IFC Investment Climate
Advisory Project (FY14-FY16)
IFC SME Banking Advisory
Project (FY13-15)
IFC Agribusiness Standards

and sources of funds, with share of NBFI assets
(including MFI, leasing, factoring and other formal
financial sector lenders) in total private financial sector
assets increased from 3 percent in 2013
• Volume of outstanding loans to MSMEs in the
portfolio of financial intermediaries supported by IFC
increased by 50% from US$0.8 billion to US$1.2
billion
• Increased financial penetration, with share of private
credit to GDP from 30 percent in 2013.

Development of
infrastructure
and maximum
realization of
Georgia’s transit
potential.
Improving
energy
independence,
energy efficiency
and increasing
electricity
exports
Developing
agricultural
infrastructure

Developing roads and energy connectivity is allowing
Georgia to benefit from its critical location between Europe
and Central Asia, with the goal of maximizing its transit
and trade potential. The focus of the Government’s efforts
to date in transport has been on developing the East-West
highway – the “back-bone” of growth in Georgia.
Developing further this critical road will allow Georgia to
lower transit costs and become more competitive as an
international transit route.
Georgia’s energy sector is also taking off and the potential
for renewable energy exports is promising. Over the last
decade, the Government has successfully transformed the
energy sector into a fast-growing one, bringing down
energy prices in parallel with increased efficiency of the
sector. The importance of consolidating this progress is
highlighted by Georgian firms who cite reliable and
affordable energy supply as a priority. Georgia’s hydropower potential can also be a source of export revenues by
providing clean renewable power to countries in the region.
Implementing a market platform for electricity
exports/trade and international standards for sustainable

(e) Facilitate investment in the regions through support
to an improved investment climate and
infrastructure.
• Increased tourism related SMEs (points of sales) in
renovated culture heritage sites and cities by 30 percent
(from 248 to 323), generating jobs.
• Increased tourist spending in targeted regions by 20
percent
CPS Objective 8:
Provision of infrastructure and services to facilitate
growth.
Outcome Indicators:
• Decreased travel time and vehicle operating costs in
rehabilitated East-West Highway sections by 40% and
10% respectively.
• Reduction of travel time and vehicle operating costs in
rehabilitated secondary and local roads sections by
20% and 30% respectively
• Enhanced energy regulatory system and electricity
market rules are implemented in line with EU Energy
Policy applicable to Georgia under the AA and Energy
Community Treaty.
• Improved reliability of the power grid infrastructure is
in place, measured by
(i) MW550 of added generation capacity
(ii) A reduced number of electricity interruptions in
the south-western part of the grid, particularly
Batumi areas, measured by number of electricity

36

Advisory ( FY14-16)
IFC Resource Efficiency
Advisory Project (FY10-FY16)
IFC Pipeline:
IFC equity investment and debt
finance, including trade, MSME,
agribusiness, housing, and
supplier finance

Potential MIGA engagement

IDA/IBRD lending:
DPO 3 (on-going, FY14)
DPO (CPS Area 2, FY15-16-17)
East West Highway Projects
(FY13, FY15)
Secondary & Local Roads
Projects (FY12, FY14, FY16)
Energy Transmission Grid
Strengthening Project (FY14)
Irrigation and Land Management
Project (FY14)
AAA:
Small Farmers TA (FY14)
Georgia Energy Sector Review
(FY14-15)
CEM Programmatic (FY14-17)
Green Transport AAA (FY15)

IFC Ongoing:
IFC Paravani HPP

development of hydropower will be critical for exports and
a reliable domestic energy supply.
Georgia needs to significantly improve agriculture
infrastructure, especially irrigation, which was neglected for
a decade. The land management and registration system
also needs strengthening to support land consolidation,
which small-holder farmers need to access markets.

Ensuring
workforce
relevance to
labor market
requirements.

With economic transformation in Georgia, some of the
older sectors and industries died, shedding their labor force.
New industries grew during the same period but have not
been able to absorb the workforce as effectively and overall
labor demand remains weak while skills mismatches
persist. The majority of the work force – more than 55
percent – is employed in agriculture (mostly selfemployed), which contributes only 8.2 percent of GDP and
is characterized by family-based subsistence farming.

interruptions at KV220
(iii) Use of net transfer capacity at new back-to-back
station increased from close-to-zero today to 300
MW.
• There is an increase in agricultural productivity (15%)
in at least 75 percent of the area where irrigation
rehabilitation takes place.

CPS Objective 9:
Improved framework for matching labor supply with
demand
Outcome Indicators:
• Procedure to match unemployed with training
programs developed and implemented.
• Labor Market information system is in place that will
allow for evidence-based policy making
Note: More detailed data on female labor force
participation will be tracked during the CPS period

37

IFC InfraV Shuakhevi HPP
IFC Pipeline:
Shuakhevi HPP
IFC Energy Infrastructure
Advisory Program ( FY14-18)
IFC PPP transaction advisory
IBRD/WBG Namakhvani HPP &
Grid development.
Potential MIGA engagement.
IDA/IBRD Lending:
DPO (CPS Area 2, FY15-16-17)
AAA:
TA: Labor Market Information
System design, implementation,
and data analysis (FY14-17)
Country Gender Assessment
(FY14)
South Caucasus Poverty, Equity
and Gender TA (FY14-17)

Annex 2: FY10-13 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY COMPLETION REPORT
CPS Board Discussion:
CPS Progress report (Board Presentation):
Period Covered by CPS Completion Report:

1.

September 10, 2009
April 19, 2011
July 1, 2009-June 30, 2013

SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS

1.
The FY10-13 CPS was prepared in the aftermath of the August 2008 conflict, and the global
economic and financial crisis. The strategic objectives of the CPS were to: (i) Meet post-conflict and
vulnerability needs; and (ii) Strength Competitiveness for Post-Crisis Growth. The Government’s Basic
Data and Directions for 2009-2012 (BDD) provided the strategic underpinning of the CPS. The main
development objectives of the BDD included macroeconomic stability, improved business environment,
increased social welfare, modernization of road and energy infrastructure, agricultural development,
better quality of education, and public sector modernization and accountability for results. In addition, a
World Bank led Joint Needs Assessment, conducted in 2008, helped the Government in identifying the
immediate needs of Georgia in the aftermath of the conflict (see Annex 5).
2.
The Program’s performance in contributing towards the achievement of the CPS outcomes
is rated Satisfactory. 19 During the CPS period, the WBG supported Georgia’s development strategy
through a financing envelope of US$823 million from IBRD and IDA (more than twice the original
envelope of US$396 million), IFC provided US$251 million of direct financing and mobilized an
additional US$36 million. MIGA provided guarantees with a net exposure of US$22.5 million. In
addition, a robust analytical and advisory program complemented and supported the lending portfolio. In
line with its strategic objectives, the program supported reforms and activities which led to significant
achievements in expanding coverage of both the targeted social assistance (TSA) and medical insurance
programs to the poorest parts of the population, scaling up benefits and reinforcing targeting
effectiveness. It also supported reforms and investments aimed at improving the business environment
and overall competitiveness, which were reflected in Georgia’s remarkable improvements on several
business and competitiveness indicators rankings. Although not an explicit objective of the CPS, poverty
rates in Georgia also saw a remarkable improvement in the latter years, decreasing from 21 percent in
2010 to 14.8 percent in 2012. Poverty analysis shows that the decrease was mainly driven by social
transfers (pensions and Targeted Social Assistance) and rising earnings, with some contribution from food
price deflation. Extreme poverty decreased from 6.7 percent in 2010, to 3.7 percent in 2012.
Notwithstanding these notable results, sustaining poverty reduction going forward will necessitate
enhanced growth and increased earnings, together with continued fiscally sustainable social expenditures.
Shortcomings remain in some of the areas targeted by the CPS such as; business environment (in
particular access to finance for SMEs), job creation, and quality of education.
19

Out of 13 CPS outcomes, 12 were achieved and 1 (health coverage) was Partially Achieved (one indicator was
partially but largely met, and all others were fully met). Out of 26 primary results indicators, 25 were met, and 1
(number of out-patient visits per capita) was partially, although largely, met.

38

3.
Performance of the World Bank Group in designing and supporting the implementation of
the CPS Program is rated Satisfactory. The WBG program grew in size while remaining focused, and
adequately responded to Georgia’s evolving circumstances. Additional and front-loading of IBRD, IDA
and IFC funds allowed the WBG to respond adequately to Georgia’s needs during the financial crisis, and
in the aftermath of the 2008 conflict. The mix of lending, equity capital, capacity building, technical
assistance and policy advice was appropriate and relevant. The CPS results matrix provided overall
realistic, relevant and measurable indicators.
2.

SUMMARY OF COUNTRY GOALS

4.
Georgia made significant gains towards the medium-term objectives outlined in the BDD, as
summarized below:
•

The macroeconomic framework remained generally positive. Georgia’s GDP grew on average
by 9.6 percent annually during 2003-2007, until the 2008 global crisis and conflict. A brisk
recovery followed between 2010 and 2012 on the back of a strong public capital spending
stimulus. The macroeconomic policy framework over the CPS period transitioned from a focus
on stimulus to one on stabilization. Starting in 2011, there was a commitment to medium term
fiscal consolidation to contain the persistent current account deficit and align it with debt
management objectives and to flexible exchange rates with inflation targeting to support external
sustainability. While there has been a slowdown in growth in 2013, this is viewed as temporary
and driven mainly by policy uncertainty following elections in 2012 and 2013, and a fall in public
investment. Nonetheless, medium term risks remain, stemming from continued Eurozone
weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the form of a wide current account deficit, high dollarization,
and gross external debt of over 80 percent of GDP. These are mitigated by continued adherence
to the IMF program and a new reform program targeting job creation and faster, more inclusive,
and sustainable growth.

•

Georgia’s competitiveness and business environment recorded significant improvements in key
areas, though others lag behind: Georgia’s Global Competitiveness ranking during 2012-2013
improved from 90th place in 2008-2009 to 77th, and the 2013 Doing Business report ranking
improved to 9th, compared with the already high ranking of 15th in 2009. Gains were also
recorded in areas supported by the Bank-financed Development Policy Operations (DPOs) and
IFC investment and advisory services: paying taxes, access to credit for infrastructure, trading
across borders and protecting investors. However, rankings for many critical ingredients of longterm competitiveness have stagnated or deteriorated (see Annex 4), while access to finance for
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) remains a constraint.

•

Roads and energy infrastructure improved: Road rehabilitation and upgrading has been a key
Government priority since 2004 and even more so in response to the dual crises, with a view to
improving access to markets and services, and providing short-term employment. Georgia
upgraded parts of the East-West Highway, significantly reducing transit time, vehicle operating
costs, and road fatalities. It also made significant strides towards improving secondary, urban, and
rural roads. The 2012-2013 Global Competitiveness Report rankings improved compared with
2008-2009, from 68th to 56th for quality of roads, and from 78th to 46th for the quality of
electricity supply.

•

Weak performance of agriculture sector: Agriculture remains an important sector in Georgia
given that over 50 percent of the population lives and works on agricultural land and agriculture
contributes about 25 percent of exports. However, the share of agriculture to GDP has
significantly declined (from 25 percent in 1999 to about 8 percent in 2012, but has started to
39

increase once again due to the new Government’s focused attention to Agriculture, recording 8.2
percent in the first six months in 2013. Between 2006 and 2010, critical public services and
infrastructure, including irrigation and advisory and veterinary services, collapsed, resulting in
weak sector performance. Agriculture contracted between 2005 and 2010 (averaging -2.1 percent
real growth) but recovered strongly in 2011(+5.5 percent real growth). Low investment and
stagnating productivity stem from fragmentation of farm land, a generally obsolete rural
infrastructure, especially irrigation, high transport costs, and poor access to markets. Poor sector
performance is widening the trade deficit and depressing incomes for rural households. In
addition, in 2013 the Parliament passed a temporary measure 20 prohibiting foreign ownership of
agricultural lands, further inhibiting foreign investment. The Government is working to develop
alternative ownership schemes, such as long-term lease.
•

Despite many important changes to the education sector, reforms have not yet translated into
improved outcomes for education in Georgia. Access to general education has been expanded
and girls and boys have largely equal access.21 However, student academic performance, as
measured by international standardized tests, remains low, both by OECD standards and when
compared to other countries in ECA. Quality of education, also in view of its impact on labor
outcomes, thus remains a pressing challenge.

•

Public sector management improved: Georgia made notable strides towards improving the
policy orientation and results-based approach of budget planning and management. The use of the
Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) in the BDD ensures better consistency between
the Government’s action plans and the multi-year budget ceilings for each line ministry, and
increased transparency: the 2012-2013 Global Competitiveness Report ranked Georgia 36th on
transparency of government policymaking, compared with 86th in 2008-09. Fiscal transparency
and accountability was enhanced by recent reforms and modernization of treasury, accounting
and reporting systems.

3.

PROGRAM PERFORMANCE

5.
The CPS Program’s performance is rated Satisfactory. The Program revolved around two
strategic objectives, four results areas, and thirteen outcomes.
First Strategic Objective: Meeting Post-conflict and Vulnerability Needs
A. Results Area 1: Economic Stability and Job Creation
6.
Outcomes were largely achieved. All results indicators were met. The WBG supported these
outcomes through four Development Policy Operations (DPO I-III and Competitiveness and Growth
DPO I) and several investment projects, including: Public Sector Financial Management Reform Support
Project (PSFMRSP); Kakheti Regional Roads Project; Rural Development; Regional and Municipal
Infrastructure Development; First and Second Secondary and Local Roads; First and Second Regional
Development, 22 and the Second Education APL. IFC continued to provide support to financial sector
20

A moratorium was announced on purchasing state owned agricultural land by foreign citizens until December 31,
2014.
21
In primary and lower secondary education, female enrolment rates are slightly below those of their male peers
(102.8% vs. 104.8% in primary and 99.9% vs. 101.6% in lower secondary). However, female Gross Enrolment
Ratio is 77.3% in upper secondary education, while for males it is 71.3%.
22
The Second Regional Development Project, however, was only approved in November, 2012.

40

investment. The Bank also provided support through extensive analytical work and technical assistance,
including a Country Economic Memorandum on sustainable development, a Public Expenditure Review,
Financial Sector Advisory, a Programmatic Poverty Assessment, and a note on labor market analysis and
skills mismatch.

7.
Public resource management improved, including a sharp reduction of the fiscal deficit, the
introduction of performance-based budgeting, and the establishment of a new local government
budgetary system in all municipalities. Georgia reduced the overall budget deficit from 9.2 percent of
GDP in 2009 to 2.9 percent in 2012, while increasing the budget share of social services to 39.7 percent
in 2012 compared with 36.3 percent in 2009 (Annex 1). 23 However, social services expenditure remains
below comparator countries in per capita terms and as a proportion of the GDP, especially in education
and health. Performance-based budgeting was introduced in all ministries starting with the 2012 Budget
Law. A new local government budgetary system was developed and introduced in all municipalities and
staff training was provided. The 2013 local budgets were presented in program format. Most projects in
the public investment program submitted to the Parliament include complete time profiles of financial
information, justification, monitoring indicators and reports on execution of the previous year planned
project implementation. Three of the four DPOs approved during the CPS period24 provided specific
contributions in the area of public sector management. These included supporting the Government’s
Public Financial Management Reform Policy Vision 2009-2013, which provided an integrated approach
to strengthening the public finance system; contributing to the formulation and implementation of resultsoriented and public investment budgeting reforms through the enactment of a new Budget Code that
helped to anchor budget planning and management in a unified legal framework; and contributed to
strengthening the efficiency of Treasury management and to improvement of the coverage and
transparency of financial reporting. PSFMRSP contributed to significant improvements in several
dimensions of PFM performance, including the adoption of a stronger multi-year perspective in fiscal
planning and budgeting; improved predictability in the availability of funds for commitment of
expenditures; improved public access to key fiscal information; and improvement in the scope, nature,
and follow-up of external audits.
8.
Systemic banks weathered well the crisis with IFC’s support. The National Bank of Georgia
effectively managed the banking crisis. IFC played a critical role in mobilizing debt and equity financing
to support Georgian banks’ liquidity and capital needs. IFC proactively addressed the risk of a potential
banking crisis through counter-cyclical investments that helped recapitalize key systemic banks and
restore market confidence. The financial health of systemic banks was monitored by IFC in tandem with
IMF reviews under Stand-By Arrangements. This proactive IFC program in Georgia was praised IEG in
2010. 25 IFC also expanded its trade finance program during a time when private international commercial
banks scaled back or eliminated their open lines for Georgian banks. Most financial health indicators
(capital adequacy and liquidity ratios, return on assets and equity, non-performing loans ratio) recovered
from the 2009 crisis. While the sector’s capital adequacy ratio and liquidity ratio marginally deteriorated
from 20.2 to 17.0 percent and from 40.6 to 39.8 percent, respectively (Annex 1), they are both
comfortably above minimum requirements. Banking sector profitability also improved and as of 2013
seems to have stabilized. The deterioration in the loan-to-deposit ratio from 129.8 to 106.7 (Annex 1) was
mainly driven by the increased level of non-resident foreign deposits. This somewhat increased external
23

The CPS definition of social expenditure included social protection, health, education, housing and community
development, and culture and recreation.
24
The Georgia Competitiveness and Growth DPO II was approved on June 27, 2013.
25
IEG, The World Bank Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis (2010, p. xvi).

41

vulnerability of the sector, but the IMF recognized that the Central Bank adopted adequate measures to
contain nonresident deposits growth going forward. 26 The performance of the IFC portfolio in three
banks, representing 66 percent of the total assets of commercial banks, met the CPS milestone of
compliance with IFC covenants. The latest IMF assessment of the banking sector concluded that financial
soundness indicators are strong for the sector as a whole, although two small banks are close to the
minimum prudential requirements. 27 Nonetheless, similar to other countries, the Georgian banking sector
is sensitive to economic cycles and highly dependent on capital inflows from IFIs and external lenders.
Moreover, high costs of lending and high levels of dollarization may increase non-performing loans
(NPLs) and banking sector risks should economic growth and domestic demand slow down.
9.
MIGA supported (on a portfolio basis) two operations covering the Georgian subsidiary of
a leading global micro-finance institution, for a total current net exposure of US$ 22.5 million. The
brief performance history of this institution since the MIGA guarantees were issued (2010, 2011) and
performance monitoring started (2013), suggests that it is satisfactory and in line with the picture of a
recovering financial sector after the 2009 crisis, as described above. The subsidiary’s volume of
outstanding loans increased, especially loans to smaller businesses, and its volume of customer deposits
grew as well. The company’s operating results improved and the return on average equity increased. In
addition, during 2012, the volume of outstanding green loans increased by 35 percent to EUR 78.2
million (where “green loans” are used to finance investments undertaken for energy efficiency, renewable
energy, and environmentally friendly investments). Loan quality is relatively satisfactory, judging by
reported arrears within the context of the global portfolio of MIGA.
10.
Temporary employment supported by Bank-financed projects helped mitigate the social
impact of the dual crises. During FY10-13 Bank-financed transport and regional infrastructure projects
generated about 45,000 person/months of temporary jobs (exceeding the CPS target of 30,000) and IFCsupported clients generated over 1,400 permanent jobs. The IEG report highlighted the Bank’s
appropriate response to rising unemployment in the wake of the crisis through labor-intensive operations
such as the Regional and Municipal Infrastructure Development and the Secondary and Local Roads
projects. 28
11.
With the support of the Education APL II Project, the percentage of children in grades 1
through 12 learning according to the new curriculum increased from about 2 percent in 2006 to 100
percent in mid-2013. However, evidence of improved education quality is limited. Georgia does not
yet have in place the monitoring framework needed to assess the implementation of the new curriculum
and its impact, and thus it is difficult to assess whether, and to what extent, it has contributed to improved
student performance and overall quality of education. However, the Education APL II Project helped with
other important steps in this direction, including the financing of teachers’ training on the new subjects,
and the use of more active pedagogical practices. Reforms of the school financing system, also supported
by the Project, helped reduce the number of schools showing a budget deficit from 1,400 to 167 in 2011,
while all schools identified as in emergency conditions were rehabilitated and refurnished.29 Remaining
challenges include the need to address teachers’ qualifications, and insufficient incentives and
instructional support materials vis-a-vis a constrained education budget (2.6 percent of GDP in 2012).
B. Results Area 2: Improve Social Services

26

Article IV, August 2013.
IMF, Staff Report for the First and Second Reviews under the Stand-By Arrangement (April 2012; April 2013).
28
IEG 2010, p.53
29
Education System Realignment and Strengthening Project (APL II, Report No. ICR20124, February 2012).
2727

42

12.
Three outcomes to improve social services were achieved, and one was substantially
achieved. All key indicators were fully met, with the exception of the number of outpatient visits per
capita for the poorest two quintiles, although this was largely achieved. The WBG supported these
outcomes through DPO I-III and Competitiveness and Growth (CG)-DPO I budget support, and through
the Health Sector Development Project (HSDP), the Regional and Municipal Infrastructure Development
Project (RMIDP), and the execution of the Trust Funds for Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). Nonlending support included the Public Expenditure Review, a Programmatic Poverty Assessment, a South
Caucasus Pension Technical Assistance, the Kakheti Regional Development Study, and the Joint Needs
Assessment Progress Report.
13.
Targeted Social Assistance (TSA) coverage and efficiency improved, significantly
contributing to the poverty reduction witnessed from 2011 onwards. However, more needs to be done
to reach more of the poor segments of the population. Over the course of the DPO series, a range of
measures were implemented to improve effectiveness of the TSA. These measures included preparing a
monitoring report, adjusting the proxy-means testing formula, improving business processes, linking the
Social Services Agency database with that of other government agencies, and recertification of
beneficiaries. In 2012 the TSA budget reached GEL279 million, compared to GEL124.5 million in 2008.
Between 2007 and 2011 the number of TSA beneficiaries increased by 18.6 percent, and leakages were
reduced. The share of the population in the bottom decile of consumption per adult equivalent receiving
TSA benefits increased from 39 percent in 2009 to 53 percent in 2012, compared to 32 percent in 2007.
Pilot modules for the state pension, state compensation, and state social package were launched in May
2013 in Tbilisi and the Rustavi and Mtskheta regional districts, and pensions increased from GEL70 in
2009 to GEL125 in 2013.
14.
Health coverage in general, and for the poor in particular, improved. DPOs I-III, CG-DPO I
and HSDP supported improved safety and quality of healthcare, expansion of health insurance coverage,
and stronger oversight of public funding for private health insurance. Enrollment of the poor in the
Medical Insurance Program (MIP) increased: the share of population in the bottom two income quintiles
with access to publicly-subsidized health care increased by 20.7 percent between 2008 and 2011. The
population eligible for MIP increased by 117 percent between 2008 and 2012, from 0.75 million in 2008
to 1.63 million in 2012; overall access to health insurance increased from 12.3 percent of the population
in 2008 to 30.8 percent in 2011 due to public subsidies for voluntary health insurance for people not
eligible to MIP. In September 2012, the MIP was extended to all the elderly and all children under the age
of six, and throughout 2013 about 800,000 new beneficiaries were effectively covered. . 30 The oversight
of private health insurance was strengthened through implementation as of December 2010 of upgraded
standards in all hospitals to improve safety and quality of healthcare services,31 creation of a stakeholder
oversight forum, financing of health insurance mediation, development of an electronic system for
beneficiary identification, enforcement of internationally-recognized reporting for medical claims, and
implementation of an information platform for processing medical claims. The Social Information
Management System (SIMS) at the Ministry of Labor, Health and Social Affairs provides consolidated
automated information about all the registered beneficiaries of government-funded social programs. This
has improved management of the MIP and other programs, such as pensions, means-tested targeted
assistance, and internally displaced person allowance distribution. By providing a comprehensive
database of registered beneficiaries, the SIMS has enabled expansion of MIP coverage to the targeted
population. In addition, it highlighted the number of unregistered and allowed a more targeted approach
to encourage them to register. The ICR for the Health Sector Development Project noted substantial
progress towards implementing public health care reform with an emphasis on the family medicine
30
31

Government Decree No. 165 dated May 7, 2012 (CG-DPO I prior action).
Government Decree No.385 dated December 17, 2010, implemented as of 2012 (CG-DPO I prior action).

43

model, introducing a new guideline development process and strengthening institutional capacities, and
improvements in critical indicators on public health care provision. 32
15.
Municipal services improved, providing beneficiaries in targeted urban and rural areas
increased access to roads, water, and encouraging private sector investments. The Regional and
Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (RMIDP) financed the implementation of 122 water,
wastewater sub-projects, and the rehabilitation of 245 km of roads. These investments led to: (i) an
increase in urban piped water services from 7 hours/day in 2008 to 17 hours/day on average by mid2013; (ii) tripled daily water production, from 40 l/day in 2008 to 120 l/day; (iii) access to improved
water sources by 181,700 people in urban areas and 181,835 people in rural areas; (iv) an increase from
6,000 piped household water connections benefitting from rehabilitation in 2008, to 83,847; and (v) a
reduction of trip times and vehicle operating costs in selected urban roads by 30 percent from October
2008. Energy efficiency for water production also doubled, from 0.63 Kwh/m3 in 2008 to 0.30 Kwh/m3
by May, 2013. In addition, RMIDP had a catalytic effect through financing the preparation of a National
Strategy for Wastewater Management which helped Georgia mobilize a US$10 million Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) grant to promote sustainable wastewater
management and pilot implementation of wastewater treatment plans. Similarly, under the first Regional
Development Project in Kakheti (RDP), average piped water services in targeted areas increased from 8
hours/day to 12 hours/day; 4,258 household water connections benefit from rehabilitation works; and
40,400 people in urban areas are being provided with access to all-season roads within a 500 meter range.
Under the Project, eight private investment proposals were also approved, as part of a pilot to attract
private sector investments in the tourism and agro-processing sectors in the Kakheti region.
16.
Housing and living conditions for internally displaced people (IDP) improved. The 2008
conflict created a new wave of displacement that added to an already sizeable population of IDPs. The
RMIDP and the Bank-executed EU Trust Fund for IDPs Emergency Rehabilitation and Construction in
Georgia financed construction of 783 new houses and rehabilitation of 1,483 existing houses for IDPs,
meeting the CPS target of 3,600 IDPs that benefitted from completed emergency relief. The RMIDP also
improved access to services, including solid waste collection and disposal system and completed
construction of 10 solid waste collection systems. In addition, the recipient-executed Trust Fund for
Georgia’s IDP Community Development Project (IDP CDP) was designed to complement these activities,
and provide a more sustainable socio-economic integration of IDP through increased livelihood
opportunities and access to public services. Although the amount was relatively small ($2.1 million) the
IDP CDP was able to target the poorest IDP communities, financing 47 micro-projects that benefitted
5,478 households. All 47 implemented micro-projects improved living conditions and access by
community members to services and infrastructure, and 25 percent of all completed micro projects
provided opportunities for income generation. Fifty percent of community development activities
participants were female.
Second Strategic Objective: Strengthening Competitiveness for Post-Crisis Growth
C. Results Area 3: Upgrade Transport Corridor and Increase Connectivity
17.
All outcomes and key indicators for the upgrade of transport corridors and increase of
connectivity were met. The reduction in transit time and road fatalities on key roads met or exceeded
targets, and the reduction in vehicle operating costs was substantially achieved. The Bank supported these
outcomes through the First, Second and Third East-West Highway projects, the Fisrt and Second
Secondary and Local Roads projects, and the Kakheti Regional Roads project. In addition, WBG support

32

Report No. ICR2179, December 2012.

44

included analytical and advisory work on improving sustainability of road management and financing,
and a policy framework on Green Transportation.
18.
Transit time was reduced on rehabilitated routes meeting targets; vehicle operating costs
were also reduced, although the level of target achievement varied for each segment. The transit time
on the Vaziani-Telavi road segment was cut by less than half from 120 minutes to 55 minutes, and the
transit time on the Agaiani-Igoeti-Sveneti-Ruisi route was reduced by 30 to 38 percent through upgrading
from a two-lane road to a four-lane highway. Operating costs for cars were reduced by 53 percent and 1015 percent, respectively, while operating costs for trucks were reduced by 38 percent and 5.3-6.6 percent,
respectively. The rehabilitation of the Rikoti Tunnel significantly improved the operation of the TbilisiKutaisi highway that links Western and Eastern Georgia.
19.
Road safety increased, exceeding targets. The number of fatalities per 10,000 vehicles declined
nationally from 13.9 in 2008 to 7.9 in 2012, corresponding to a 43 percent reduction. The Highway II and
III projects contributed to increased road safety. Fatalities were reduced by 13 percent on the VezianiTeliavi road, 43 percent on the Tbilisi-Senaki segment and 53 percent on the Igoeti-Sveneti road – against
a targeted 14 percent reduction. By mid-2012 traffic conditions were improved at 24 hazardous locations
by installing barriers and guardrails, relocating bus stops, constructing highway accesses, and providing
traffic marling and signs. A National Road Safety Action Plan, supported under the Highway II Project, is
also under implementation.33
D. Results Area 4: Accelerate Business Growth
20.
All outcomes to accelerate business growth were achieved. All milestones were met at the
Progress Report stage 34 (one, on “grant support to supply chains”, was dropped at the Government’s
request); all results indicators were met. The WBG supported these outcomes through the Development
Policy Operations; the Electricity Market Support, Infrastructure Pre-Investment Facility, Secondary and
Local Roads I and II, Kakheti Regional Roads, Rural Development, and Avian Influenza Control and
Human Pandemic Preparedness projects. IFC provided significant hydropower investments, as well as
support for SMEs’ access to finance, and food safety. In addition, the WBG provided extensive analytical
and advisory support, including reports on Trade and Development, a report on Fostering
Entrepreneurship, and a Competitive Industries Technical Assistance (TA).
21.
The overall business environment improved. All results indicators have been met. The tax
compliance burden was reduced, customs procedures were streamlined and trade reforms advanced, while
access to finance seems to be a somewhat less severe obstacle for SMEs.35 Before 2010 a uniform tax
treatment for all businesses led to higher tax compliance costs for smaller businesses relative to their
revenue. Georgia adopted laws on food safety, veterinary and plant protection, on free trade and
competition, and on general safety and liability needed to meet the requirements of the Deep and
Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA) whose negotiation with the EU was successfully concluded in
July, 2013. Several Decrees were adopted with a view to enhancing customs efficiency and facilitating
trade. 36 The quality of road transport and electricity supply improved. IFC assisted the Ministry of
Finance to design a simplified tax regime for micro and small businesses and implement it as of January
1, 2011. Subsequent surveys indicated that micro and small businesses save $15.8 million a year in tax
compliance costs.

33

Second East-West Highway Improvement Project (Report No. ICR2343, December 2012).
Progress Report on the Country Partnership Strategy for Georgia, March 9, 2011
35
Development Policy Operations I-III (Report No. ICR2492, December 2012).
36
CG-DPO I prior actions 1.1 and 1.2 (Report No.67922-GE, July 2012, Operation Policy Matrix).
34

45

22.
IFC’s program also supported regional integration through hydropower investments aimed
at helping Georgia realize its significant hydropower energy potential in an environmentally and
socially sustainable manner. In 2011 and 2012 IFC made a long term loan of $41 million and mobilized
an additional $12 million to help construct the Paravani HPP, which is expected to generate 409 GWh of
electricity per year, and to avoid GHG emissions by an estimated 32,000 tons of CO2 per year, enabling
export of clean electricity to Turkey. In addition, IFC was a co-developer of the Adjaritskali HPP project,
a series of cascades of up to 400 MW of hydropower in the Adjara region. As discussed in Section 2, the
overall business environment showed impressive gains and Doing Business upgraded Georgia’s ranking
from 15th in 2008 to 9th in 2013. The Global Competitiveness Index (GCI) ranking of Georgia also
improved from 90th in 2008-2009 to 77th in 2012-2013.
23.
At the same time, the overall improvement of Georgia’s competitiveness ranking conceals
important gaps, particularly with respect to innovation and access to finance. In spite of dynamic
growth over the past few years, Georgia’s exports have been losing global market share between 2005
and 2010, including top exports such as hazelnuts, water and wine. 37 The sophistication of Georgia’s
export basket is relatively low and has not significantly improved over the last decade. 38 While lending
infrastructure has significantly improved in the recent years, access to finance for SMEs remains limited
due to high cost, tight credit underwriting, and collateral requirements. Moreover, 63 percent of loans are
issued in foreign currency, which exposes non-exporter SMEs to foreign currency risks. The 2013 BEEPS
survey indicates a significant decrease in the percent of firms that identify access to finance as a
moderate, major or very severe obstacle, from 55 percent in 2008 to 30 percent in 2013. This trend
towards an improving perception by firms of access to finance is consistent with what IFC has observed
in the banking sector over the same time period. In 2009 and 2010 Georgian banks were still recovering
from weakened balance sheets resulting from the effects of the 2008 conflict, the fallout from the global
financial crisis, and a spike in NPLs. During these years, banks focused largely on restructuring their
portfolios rather than on new lending. However, starting in 2011 and 2012, banks returned to lending, and
private sector credit as percent of GDP increased from 29.2 in 2009 to 33.3 in 2012. Notwithstanding
these positive indications, access to finance continues to be a challenge for business growth in Georgia, as
confirmed by the 2012 IFC Business Perception Survey and the 2013-14 Global Competitiveness report.
Both sources rank access to finance as a problematic factor for doing business in Georgia. While MSMEs
represented 96 percent of Georgia’s 42,530 registered businesses and employed almost 43 percent of the
country’s workforce in 2010, SMEs share in GDP was less than 19 percent, as compared with an ECA
average of 60 percent. According to the USAID 2011 report on financial sector development, MSMEs in
Georgia received only 20 percent of total bank loans. The World Bank undertook in-depth analyses of
growth challenges, export vulnerabilities, constraints to entrepreneurship and private sector growth and
jobs creation through the Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), a Trade and Development study for
the South Caucasus, a Competitive Industries TA, and the Fostering Entrepreneurship Report. Based on
this extensive analytical work, the Bank proposed policy options and helped organize several high-level
policy discussions, including a Competitiveness Workshop, high-level policy discussions on innovationled growth and the role of ICT development, an international conference on Deposit Insurance, and
brainstorming on Pension Reform to support discussions about second generation reform options. This
work contributed to the preparation of Georgia’s longer term Development Strategy 2020, 39 which reflects
many of the Bank’s proposed recommendations on fostering entrepreneurship, innovation and technology
37

Wine and water exports were significantly affected by closure of the border with Russia. Wine exports to Russia
were resumed in June, 2013.
38
World Bank Institute’s (WBI) 2012 Knowledge Assessment Methodology; Innovation Index of the WBI
Knowledge Economy Index; INSEAD-WIPO Global Innovation Index 2012; Georgia-Export Competitiveness
Framework (draft working paper, ECSF2, January 2013).
39
Georgia: A Roadmap to Competitiveness (World Bank Country Office, Tbilisi, March 2013).

46

adoption, developing skills, enhancing firm-level productivity, deepening national savings through further
reforms in the financial sector, and improving access to markets and finance for SMEs. Farmers’ access to
rural finance also increased with the support of the Bank-financed Rural Development Project, with 41.4
percent of the rural households getting access to finance in June 2011 compared with 28.3 percent in
October 2005. However, although agribusiness financing remained severely restricted in 2000s, with bank
lending to agriculture not exceeding 1 percent of the total lending portfolio, the Agriculture Fund
established by the new Government in 2013 started to yield results by providing several financing
schemes to farmers and food processing. This resulted in an increase in the agriculture lending portfolio,
which almost doubled in nominal terms during 2013, although its share in the total lending portfolio
remains low at 1.5 percent of the total (as of January 1, 2014). IFC played an important role in facilitating
access to finance for SMEs. As of end-2012, IFC client banks held an outstanding MSME portfolio of
76,158 loans totaling US$900 million, above the pre-crisis level of US$750 million. However, more
fundamental structural reforms in the private and financial sector will need to be undertaken to improve
financial access and creditworthiness of enterprises, so that they can grow in quality and size, innovate
and create new jobs.
24.
There were improvements in agriculture incomes and exports, but within an overall
declining sector performance (see Section 2). The income of farmers and enterprises (proxy for
unavailable production data) supported by the Bank-financed Rural Development Project increased by
28.3 percent between October 2005 and June 2011. Domestic sales and exports are expected to benefit
from the enactment in May 2012 of Laws on food and feed safety, veterinary and plant protection, general
safety and liability, and free trade and competition, and from the proposed legislative package for a
DCFTA with the EU (supported by the CG DPO series). Roads financed by the Secondary and Local
Roads I and II and the Kakheti Regional Roads projects improved access to markets, reducing transit time
by an estimated 30 percent in the Kakheti region. Food safety monitoring and enforcement capacity was
supported by the Avian Influenza Control and Human Pandemic Preparedness and Rural Development
projects, which helped establish a Food Safety Agency, develop procedures in line with international
standards, and build capacities. 40 The IFC Food Safety Project increased food processors’ awareness of
food safety issues, helped increase sales and investments and strengthened the Government’s capacity to
enforce food safety regulations. IFC also invested $1.5 million in Georgia’s largest wine exporter,
enabling the company to expand its production and exports, as well as lent $1.5 million to Georgia’s
largest mushroom producer. Agriculture exports increased to US$450.6 million in 2012 compared with
US$286 million in 2009.

4.

WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE

25.
The World Bank Group’s overall performance is rated Satisfactory based on: (i) the CPS
scope and focus addressed well Georgia’s emergency needs and development goabyebls, and were
consistent with the post-conflict recovery program underwritten by the donor community in October
2008; (ii) the CPS provided an adequate framework for WBG-financed operations, technical and advisory
activities, and had explicit monitorable targets; (iii) the CPS program was effectively implemented and
substantively contributed to Georgia’s post-conflict recovery, crisis mitigation and strategic development
goals through budget support, financing of critical investments and equity participation, capacity building,
policy advice, and technical assistance (Annex 1); (iv) the WBG carried out a constructive and effective
dialogue with the Georgian Authorities and other stakeholders, responded promptly to evolving
circumstances and country needs, and mitigated risks appropriately; and (v) the WBG coordinated
effectively with other IFIs, the UN system and bilateral partners.
40

Rural Development Project (Report No. ICR2352, June 2012) and Avian Influenza Control and Human Pandemic
Preparedness Project (Report No. ICR2046, December 2011).

47

A. Design
•

The CPS program maintained focus and selectivity. The Bank-financed program remained focused
on supporting Georgia’s post-conflict and vulnerability needs, particularly in the first half of the CPS
period, and on strengthening competitiveness and growth, which increasingly became the focus of the
program in the second half. It did so by focusing on: (i) budgetary support through five DPOs
(amounting to US$295 million), supporting deepening reforms in social assistance, the business
environment, and the expenditure framework; (ii) regional development to improve municipal
infrastructure and promote tourism; and (iii) infrastructure, particularly roads, to strengthen internal
connectivity and Georgia’s role as a transport corridor within the South Caucasus. At the end of
FY13, the Bank’s investment portfolio focused on two main sectors: Transport (68 percent), and
Regional Development (32 percent). IFC’s investments in FY10-13, totaling US$251 million of direct
financing and an additional US$36 million in mobilized funds, continued to support the recovery of
Georgia’s financial system and was invested to create new renewable energy assets and support
agribusiness for export. Analytical and advisory support, including Trust Funds, complemented the
lending and investment portfolios, and remained strongly linked to the CPS outcomes and overall
strategic objectives.

•

The mid-term CPS Progress Report was used as an opportunity to respond to evolving
circumstances. At mid-term, a plan for additional program interventions was laid-out to address the
continuing economic and social vulnerabilities, while also supporting recovery and medium-term
growth. Additional IBRD and IDA resources were made available, including continued access by
Georgia to IDA-16 at the same levels as the previous IDA replenishment.

•

Critical risks to the implementation of the CPS program were well identified. They included: (i) the
potential for the economic downturn to be longer and deeper than anticipated; (ii) limited scope for
Bank financial support to respond to emerging needs in the outer years of the CPS; and (iii) rapid
growth of non-concessional borrowing in the wake of the crisis. The program’s design, which
included building a strong basis for recovery and post-crisis growth, medium term fiscal adjustment
and careful debt management, helped mitigate such risks.

•

The CPS Results Matrix was realistic and measurable. The Progress Report reconfirmed virtually
all primary results indicators, occasionally with more ambitious goals and clearer definitions. Some
outcomes, for example quality of education, were measured through proxy indicators (in this case the
percentage of children learning through revised curricula), which is considered appropriate
considering the CPS timeframe and the numerous factors influencing quality of education.
B. Implementation

•

The Bank’s financial support helped address Georgia’s post-conflict needs, mitigate the impact of
the economic crisis, and advance its development goals. The 2010 IEG report on The World Bank
Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis highlighted the fast, relevant and high quality WBG
response to Georgia’s crisis. IDA/IBRD lending exceeded by 107.8 percent the original CPS planned
program of US$396 million and by 35.8 percent the CPSPR increased program of US$606 million:
FY10-13 commitments totaled US$823 million, in addition to the US$135.4 million in undisbursed
balance of previously approved operations (Annex 2).

•

Georgia’s financing needs to address its economic and social vulnerabilities, and its subsequent
recovery and medium-term growth agenda, were adequately addressed through additional and
frontloading of WBG resources, and through continued IDA eligibility for the period FY12-14.
During the CPS cycle the Board approved 11 projects, including five DPOs that provided US$295
million (about 35 percent of total Bank lending) in budget support, and three Additional Financings.
The new projects and additional financings were aligned with the CPS strategic objectives. Lending
48

was front-loaded in response to Georgia’s urgent needs, with 73 percent of the original CPS proposed
lending committed in the first year. The 2013 Country Survey ranked the Bank’s financial support as
its most important contribution to Georgia’s development goals (Annex 6). The DPOs provided
essential budget support for reforms directly aimed at increasing competitiveness and mitigating
social vulnerabilities.
•

IFC’s continued support to the banking sector helped accelerate recovery of bank lending,
mitigating the impact of the economic crisis. IFC continued its lending to commercial banks to
support small and medium sized enterprises which are an important driver of employment and
diversified economic growth. IFC’s support in trade finance was critical to keep imports and exports
flowing, as private international commercial banks reduced or suspended their trade lines for local
Georgian banks. IFC also provided important risk management tools and additional equity
investments.

•

Complementarity between the Bank and IFC, enhanced by the co-location of the Bank and IFC
offices in Tbilisi, maximized the effectiveness and impact of the Program. In order to increase focus
on Georgia and the South Caucasus sub-region, in 2009 IFC moved senior staff resources to Tbilisi
for the first time. This enabled an expanded IFC program and enhanced cooperation with the Bank.
Specific examples of close interaction and complementarity include: (i) road infrastructure, where
Bank financing of highways was paralleled by IFC advisory and a pre-feasibility study for a potential
East-West Highway PPP project; (ii) energy, where the Bank and IFC are assisting Georgia to
develop its significant hydropower potential, including the 400 MW Adajritskali HPP Project; (iii)
tourism, where the Bank is financing regional development projects in Kakheti and Imereti that will
be supported by IFC through the development of municipal infrastructure and a business environment
attractive to investors; (iv) agribusiness, where Bank support for the creation of a regulatory Food
Safety Agency and articulation of food safety guidelines through the Avian Influenza Control and
Human Pandemic Preparedness Project and the Rural Development Project was complemented by
the IFC Food Safety Project, which enhanced food processors’ awareness, helped increase their sales
and investment, and helped build government oversight capacity.

•

Technical assistance and advisory activities helped mitigate Georgia’s capacity constraints. The
2013 Country Survey highly rated the Bank’s TA and capacity building activities (see Annex 6), and
considered them essential to Georgia’s policy formulation and implementation. The advisory
financing provided to Georgia in FY10-13 through Trust Funds, including Institutional Development
Funds and IFC, totaled about US$22 million. 41 On the analytical front, joint Bank and IFC
collaboration focused on fostering entrepreneurship and access to finance, improving the investment
climate, and developing Georgia’s tourism strategy.

•

Georgia’s portfolio has been characterized by good implementation performance and satisfactory
achievement of results (see Table 1). Georgia’s disbursement ratio (for IBRD and IDA) has been
among the highest in the Bank and the ECA region, with an average of 79 percent during the CPS
period. The percentage of Problem Projects has historically been very low, and decreased to zero in
FY12 and FY13. The high quality of the portfolio is the result of well-designed projects that benefit
from strong client ownership and capacity and of a close, joint implementation by the Government
and the Bank. In addition, because all Bank-financed projects are implemented by line ministries or
by implementation units fully integrated into them, the level of ownership is further strengthened.
IFC’s investment portfolio at the end of FY13 also maintained strong performance with low levels of
non-performing loans standing at about 2.7 percent of the total outstanding portfolio, realized net
equity gains of US$12.1 million, and unrealized gains on equity investments of US$62.9 million.

41

Twenty four TFs with disbursements amounting to US$7.3 million approved in FY10-13, in addition to another
18 operations approved in previous years with US$14.5 million disbursed to date.

49

Table 1: Selected Bank Portfolio Indicators
Indicators
Disbursement ratio:
Georgia
ECA Average
Number of projects
Projects at risk
Problem projects

FY10

FY11

FY12

FY13

113
19
12
1
1

54
20
8
3
2

98
26
6
1
0

49
24
8
0
0

•

Coordination with external partners took advantage of the location of the Bank’s Regional Office
in Tbilisi, which facilitated senior-level consultations and provided more extensive technical capacity
in the field. The JNA process, which was led by the Bank, strengthened donor coordination and
provided a more permanent and transparent framework for supporting Georgia. Coordination is
particularly strong at sector level and for capacity building, the latter evidenced by the mobilization of
Trust Funds. An example of aid coordination is the engagement in the Education sector, where the
Bank worked closely with the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) during its preparation of a
US$122 million education project. The Bank provided technical support, and was engaged in the
project design. The Bank and MCC subsequently collaborated and jointly funded a tracer study on
vocational education graduates in 2013. In the Transport sector, the Bank has taken the lead in
convening annual donor meetings to exchange ideas and strengthen coordination with respect to the
overall transport sector policy and road sector financing plans. In addition to the Bank, key donors in
the Transport sector include ADB, JICA, and EIB. The Bank closely coordinated with the IMF
during the preparation and supervision of DPOs, and on analytical activities of common interest. IFC
also made numerous co-investments alongside other partners such as EBRD, DEG, FMO and OPIC.
This positive assessment notwithstanding, feedback from donors and stakeholders suggest room for
improvement to increase harmonization on Georgia’s strategic development agenda, technical
assistance, and analytical and advisory activities.

•

Mitigation of risks has been effective. With respect to economic risks, the WBG contributed through
budget support, increased and front-loaded financing, financing of systemic banks, and capacity
building, to Georgia’s resumed strong growth in 2010, bringing the fiscal deficit and inflation under
control, maintaining banking sector health, easing bank credit constraints, and keeping external debt
within manageable limits.

5.

MAIN LESSONS

26.
Importance of maintaining balance in the program between stimulating growth and
supporting poverty reduction through the social protection system. Poverty reduction achievements
in the latter part of the previous CPS period (from 2011 onwards) were mainly brought about by an
improved social protection system (pensions and TSA) that allowed for increased transfers to the poor.
Through its Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA) and the Development Policy Operation (DPO)
series, the WBG program had contributed to the design and implementation of the TSA while, at the same
time, carried out poverty analysis to evaluate impacts. In parallel, the WBG program continued to focus
on the growth agenda through identifying constraints to private sector-led growth and through investing
in strengthening infrastructure and services for competitiveness.
27.
Analytical work should remain an essential component of the program, continuing to
provide the underpinning for DPO-supported reforms and complementarity to the lending
program. During the CPS period, the analytical work helped in understanding growth dynamics, poverty,
and public sector performance, and played a key role in proposing development solutions and informing
the Government’s own development strategy. For example, the FY12 Public Expenditure Review,
50

together with a series of Poverty Assessments, provided critical knowledge on understanding how out-ofpocket expenditures in health care were impacting poverty, which in turn has informed the Government’s
program on universal health insurance. The AAA program was aligned with lending, whereby key
analysis had nourished the design of operations and helped prioritize reforms and engagements. The 2013
Country Survey highly rated the Bank’s analytical work and capacity building activities, considering them
essential to policy formulation and implementation.
28.
The selectivity and complementarity between IBRD, IFC and MIGA has been effective.
WBG funding was channeled to maximize comparative advantage, technical knowledge, and
complementarities. The selectivity in the Bank’s program allowed for an approach that balanced
concerted focus on strengthening the effectiveness of public expenditure and administration through AAA
and DPO policy reforms, together with targeting specific investments in infrastructure and regional
development programs. This complemented IFC support, which continued to focus on strengthening the
financial system and supporting enterprises in agribusiness, as well as MIGA’s engagement in the
financial sector.
29.
Program selectivity has been a strong feature of the program, facilitated by donor
coordination, and should be continued. The Bank’s program was selectively focused on one DPO
series that channeled critical reform measures, complimented by support from other donors particularly in
the social sectors (EU, MCC in education, USAID in health, etc.). In parallel, the investment lending
portfolio included projects in infrastructure and regional development programs, whereby selectivity was
facilitated by the availability of funds from other donors. For example, the ADB has taken the lead in the
water sector, while the EU, FAO and USAID have concentrated efforts in agriculture and rural
development. The WBG has taken the lead in transport, and in municipal and regional infrastructure, with
an increasing focus on the energy sector to complement policy actions and IFC investments.
30.
Lending flexibility and continued IDA eligibility proved essential in responding to Georgia’s
needs. This included front-loading of IBRD and IDA funds to adequately respond to Georgia’s priorities
and needs during the financial crisis, and in the aftermath of the 2008 conflict. In addition, Georgia
retained eligibility for IDA-16 over the period FY12-14, thereby allowing access to critical resources,
while also maintaining other IFIs’ funds on a concessional basis.
31.
Importance of continued capacity building in public the administration with more effective
monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The concerted focus in the portfolio on infrastructure has resulted
in significant implementation capacity being built as evidenced by the strong portfolio performance and
disbursement rates: this supports sustainability and provides a good foundation for enhanced support.
The AAA program included analysis of public sector implementation issues and identification of capacity
constraints, recommending that a stronger focus on capacity building across Government, especially
cross-sectoral coordination. There is a need to support more effective M&E and impact assessments
within Government and within the CPS program, including improving the way results are monitored.
More rigorous impact evaluations should be carried out to measure contributions to poverty reduction and
shared prosperity, and to influence the design of future projects. This is essential for strengthening the
science of delivery approach in the program.
32.
Gender should be an increasingly embedded and cross-cutting element of the Bank's
program, with emphasis on monitoring gender impacts. A number of projects included genderdisaggregated data monitoring as part of their results framework. This approach should become more
systematic and encompass, to the extent possible, the entire portfolio, with a view to better capture gender
impacts.
33.
Strategic donor coordination can help enhance impact, by focusing on the Bank’s
comparative advantage and value-added. Although the Bank has played an active role in involving
51

other donors in the development and the implementation of the CPS, both the Client and donors noted
some limitations of the sector focus of donor coordination, such as in the areas of capacity building and
technical assistance. The Government itself could take a stronger lead role in donor coordination, by
strengthening its own capacity for strategic planning, inter-sector harmonization and arbitration, and
interface with the Parliament, other stakeholders and the civil society. The Bank, on the other hand,
should take the opportunity, during the design of the new CPS, to identify maximize complementarity,
effectiveness, and efficiency of resources across sectors.

52

CPSCR Annex 1
Georgia FY10-13 CPS Results Matrix

CPS OBJECTIVE 1: MEETING POST-CONFLICT AND VULNERABILIY NEEDS
Key Government Goals
•
•

Maintain macro and fiscal stability. Promote growth in 2010 and beyond (to be monitored in growth rates, inflation rates, public external debt)
Increase bank lending and build a strengthened banking and supervision system, capable of supporting private sector growth (to be monitored in increase in bank lending,
level of NPLs)
• Create and maintain jobs (to be monitored in the overall unemployment rate)
• Enhance learning outcomes (to be monitored by TIMSS and PIRLS)
• Increase social support and services, including social safety nets, health and IDP support (to be measured in poverty levels)
Key Issues and Obstacles:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Contraction of external trade, remittances and capital inflows is reducing growth and fiscal space
The August conflict and impact of the fall in GDP growth may lead to a rise in the poor
Public administration, expenditure management, and procurement practices in need of improvement
Lower growth is reducing job creation in the private sector and leading to rising unemployment
Financial intermediation impacted and may be inadequate to maintain vibrant private sector.
As health care is privatized, access to affordable care needs to be ensured and services improved
The targeted poverty benefit, which is operating well, needs to be expanded to cover more of the poor
Progress in improving general education needs to be maintained through further expanding curricula reform, more teacher training, upgrading primary and secondary
schools poor physical infrastructure as this limits learning outcomes

•

Local infrastructure (water, roads, etc) needs sustainable improvement.

CPS RESULT AREAS, OUTCOMES AND TARGETS – AS
REVISED BY CPS PR

PROGRESS TO DATE

LENDING AND NON-LENDING
ACTIVITIES THAT CONTRIBUTED TO
THE OUTCOME

Results Area 1: Preserve Economic Stability and Create
Jobs
Outcome 1: Improved public resource management

Achieved.

--Primary Indicator (revised): Fiscal deficit is managed in a
non-inflationary way, while maintaining support for key social
services (2009 baseline: fiscal deficit = 9 percent. Target =
gradual reduction consistent with fiscal sustainability). Share of
social sector expenditure in state budget was 36 percent in 2009.

Met. Fiscal deficit 3% of GDP in 2012. Expenditure for
social services 39.7% of state budget in 2012

53

Lending: Public Sector Fin. Management Reform
Support Project (approved FY06, closed FY12),
Regional and Municipal Infrastructure
Development project (approved FY09), DPO
Series on fiscal and budget policies

Target = no decrease in share of social sector expenditures in
state budget).
--Primary Indicatory (revised): Introduction of results-based
budgeting (Baseline = none. Target = all ministries)

-- Primary Indicator: Establishment and rollout of local
government budget system (Baseline = none. Target = 69 LGUs
use this)

Met. Budgets for 2012 and 2013 approved in program
format. All Ministries have developed performance
indicators.
Met. The Budgetary and Financial management System
for the Municipalities and the Ministry of Finance was
developed and installed with staff trained in all
municipalities at the time of CPS PR. Local government
budgets for 2013 were presented in program format.

Non-lending: Development of country strategy
ROSC (FY10). CEM (FY12). Public Expenditure
Review (FY12). Follow up on PEFA (completed in
Q1 of FY14). Georgia Book on anti-corruption
reforms (FY12). Strengthening Parliament
Capacity IDF (Approved FY12).

IFC: Helping Reform the Tax System (FY10),
Outcome 2: Improved performance of key financial
institutions

Achieved

- Primary Indicator (revised): Financial health of and lending
levels by Georgian commercial banks improved as measured by
following indicators (baselines are as of September 2009):

Met. Financial indicators recovered from the 2009 crisis
(see main text for more background). Capital Adequacy
Ratio: 17

Capital Adequacy Ratio: 20.2

Return on Assets: 1

Return on Assets: – 1.4

Return on Equity: 5.8

Return on Equity: – 7.2

Level of NPL: 9.3

Level of NPL: 18.2

Liquidity ratio: 39.8

Liquidity ratio: 40.6

Loan to deposit ratio: 106.7

Lending: Rural Development Project (Approved
FY05, closed FY11).

Loan to deposit ratio: 129.8
Note: The 2008 baselines for Liquidity Ratio and Loan to
Deposit Ratio have been revised, to reflect the correct figures
provided by the National Bank of Georgia within the scope of
the CPS Completion Report. In addition, the text clarifies that
ROA and ROE were negative.

54

Non-lending: South Caucasus Financial Sector
Advisory (FY10-FY12), FIRST grant to strengthen
the FSA (FY10)
IFC: Coordinated IFI effort to ensure bank capital
and liquidity, trade and micro-finance lines of
credit, providing advisory to individual private
banks on risk management and NPL workouts and
other banking advisory products.

Achieved.
Outcome 3: Increased employment through Bank financed
projects
-- Primary Indicator: Number of new job-months created in
World Bank Group financed projects (Baseline = 0. Target = at
least 30,000 man-months of labor)

Met. About 45,000 man-months of labor were created
under the Bank financed projects after the CPS approval.
In addition, IFC clients generated over 1,400 permanent
jobs.
Achieved
Met. 100% of children in basic education (grades 1-12)
learning according to improved national curriculum as of
May 2013.

Lending: Regional and Municipal Development
(Approved FY09), Secondary and Local Roads
(Approved FY04, closed FY12), Secondary and
Local Roads 2 (Approved FY12), E-W Highways I
(Approved FY06, closed FY13), II (Approved
FY08, closed FY12), III (Approved FY10),
Kakheti Roads (Approved FY10), Regional
Development projects (Approved FY12), Second
regional Development project (Approved FY13).
Non-lending: Georgia Programmatic Poverty Poverty and Crisis Impact Note (FY10); South
Caucasus Programmatic Poverty Assessment –
note on Labor market analysis and skills mismatch
in Georgia (FY12);

Outcome 4: Improved quality of education
-- Primary Indicator: Percentage of children learning according
to the improved national curriculum (2006 baseline = about 2
percent. Target = at least 95 percent by 2012).

IFC: Infrastructure CEI (FY11-13); Paravani
HEP (FY10-13), Tbilvino (FY12), Rakeen Georgia
(FY09), BR Housing (FY09).
Lending: Education APL II (approved FY07,
closed FY12) and PHRD co-financing, CG DPO I
(FY13).
Non-lending: EPDF support to Education strategy
(FY11).

Results Area 2: Improve Social Services
Lending: DPO series

Achieved
55

Outcome 1: Increased coverage and efficiency of TSA
-- Primary Indicator: Percent of the extreme poor that receive
poverty benefits through TSA (2009 baseline = 38.9 percent.
Target = at least 50)

Met: 53% of bottom decile of consumption per adult
equivalent received TSA benefits in 2011 (UNICEF
2012).

Non-lending: Georgia Programmatic Poverty
Assessment (FY10); South Caucasus Programmatic
Poverty Assessments (FY10-13), Policy Note –
Reducing Poverty (FY13); Public Expenditure
Review (FY12).

CR Note: “extreme poor” refers to the “bottom decile of
consumption per adult equivalent”.
Partially Achieved
Outcome 2: Wider health coverage facilitated through
improved budgeting, infrastructure and information
systems.
-- Primary Indicator (revised): Share of bottom two quintiles
with access to subsidized health insurance (2009 baseline = 27.6
percent. Target = over 45 percent)
-- Primary Indicator: Health care service utilization by poor
population as measured by number of out-patient visits per
capita (2009 baseline=1.4 Target = 2.6)
-- Primary Indicator: Better targeting of services through the
development of an effective health care information data base

Met: Universal Health Insurance introduced in February Lending: Health Sector Development (Approved
FY03, closed FY12); DPO and CG DPO Series.
2013 ensures 100% coverage.

Partially Met: Number of out-patient visits per capita 2.47 for poor (poorest two quintiles).

Met: The Social Assistance Information System (SIMS)
development completed and being rolled out. Pilot
modules for state pension, compensation package
launched in May 2013 in Tbilisi and the Rustavi and
Mtskheta regional districts.
Lending: Regional and Municipal Infrastructure
Development (Approved FY09), Regional
Development Project (approved FY12).

Achieved
Outcome 3: Improved Municipal Services in Supported
areas (water, local roads etc)
3

Met: 0.3 KWh/m as of May 2013
-- Primary Indicators
-average reduction in KWh consumed per m3 due to
introduction of energy efficient water production methods (2008
baseline = 0.7. Target = 0.4)
- Average increased # of hours per day of piped water service
(2008 baseline = 7 h. Target = 12 h.)

Non-lending: Programmatic Poverty Assessments,
Pension Technical assistance (FY13), Policy Note –
Health Sector Improvement (FY13); Public
Expenditure Review (FY12).

Met: 17 hours per day as of May 2013

Met: 70% of 2008 trip baseline as of May 2013

56

Non-lending: Sustainable Urban Development
Strategy for Kakheti Region (FY12), City Capital
Investment Planning and Budgeting Project
(FY12), PHRD Rural Development Project (closed
FY11), Policy Note – Social Development (FY13),
Policy Note – Municipal and Regional
Development (FY13).

-average reduction in trip time due to improved secondary roads
(2008 baseline = 100%. Target = 70%)
Achieved
Outcome 4: Improved IDP housing and welfare
-- Primary Indicator: Number of beneficiaries from completed
post-conflict rehabilitation/construction (2008 baseline = 0
target = 3,600 by end-2009)

Met: About 3,600 IDPs have benefited from the
construction of 783 houses.
Met: 139 subprojects for water supply, wastewater
collection and road construction implemented.

-- Primary Indicator: Broader support to IDPs: expand
infrastructure and improve living conditions (2009 baseline = 0.
Target = 3500 IDPs)

57

Lending: Regional and Municipal Infrastructure
Development (Approved FY09).
Non-lending: Joint Needs Assessment Progress
Report (FY10), IDP Community Development
TFs.

CPS Objective 2: Strengthening Competitiveness for Post-Crisis Growth

Key Government Goals
•
•

Strengthen Georgia’s role as a regional transport corridor and improve connectivity within Georgia (to be measured by increased transit traffic)
Continue to deepen Georgia’s private sector friendly environment for higher business growth (to be measured by the level of growth of foreign
investment, SMEs).
•
Build a more efficient and productive rural sector. (to be measured by increase in agriculture exports, farm income)
• Establish greater energy security and efficiency (to be measured by amount of energy produced and exported)
Key Issues and Obstacles:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Transport: E-W corridor needs improvement. Black sea ports need modernization. Road safety needs improvement
Tremendous progress achieved in the business environment to be sustained through further strengthening of several areas (tax, customs)
The financing system remains shallow. SMEs have limited credit access and households to mortgages
Energy: Increased potential for hydropower needs to be developed
Households, businesses and farmers need improved mechanisms to cope with natural disasters
Agriculture – need to improve agriculture productivity, food certification and processing, irrigation framework, crop and livestock disease risk

CPS RESULT AREAS, OUTCOMES AND
TARGETS – AS REVISED BY CPS PR

PROGRESS TO DATE

LENDING AND NONLENDING
ACTIVITIES THAT CONTRIBUTED TO
THE OUTCOME

Results Area 3: Upgrade Transport Corridor and
Increase Connectivity
Outcome 1: Transport time and costs reduced along
key transport routes

Primary Indicator: Transit time and vehicle operating
costs along various supported segments improved by over

Achieved – transit time indicator was overachieved
on each of the three sections; vehicle operating
costs have been reduced by 38% for cars and by
25% for trucks (calculated as weighted average for
the three sections).
Met: 55 minute target achieved (78% reduction) on
58

Lending: E-W Highways I (Approved
FY06, closed FY13), E-W Highways II
(Approved FY08, closed FY12); E-W
Highways III (Approved FY10); Kakheti
Roads (Approved FY10); Secondary and
Local Roads (Approved FY09), Second
Secondary and Local Roads (Approved

25%:

the 65 km section.

FY12) projects including Additional
Financings.

Transit time to Telavi – baseline=120. Target=55 –
in minutes)

Vehicle operating costs have been reduced from
0.36 USD/veh-km to 0.7 USD/veh-km for cars
(53% reduction), and from 1.05 USD/veh-km to
0.65 USD/veh-km for trucks (38% reduction).

Transit time from Agaiani to Igoeti 2006 baseline =
10. Target = 7 – in minutes)

Met: 7 minute target achieved (30% reduction) on
the 13 km section.
Vehicle operating costs have been reduced from
0.20 USD/veh-km to 0.17 USD/veh-km for cars
(15% reduction), and from 0.76 USD/veh-km to
0.71 USD/veh-km for trucks (6.6% reduction).

Transit time from Igoeti to Sveneti 2007 baseline =
19. Target = 12 - in minutes)

Met: 12 minute target achieved (38% reduction) on
the 24 km section.

Non-lending: Regional Standards and
Quality Infrastructure (FY11), Improving
sustainability of roads management and
financing in Georgia (FY11); A policy
framework on Green Transportation in
Georgia (FY12); Road safety management
capacity diagnostic review in Georgia (FY13)

IFC: Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory
Facility (PPIAF, FY12), Regional Roads
Advisory (FY10).

Vehicle operating costs have been reduced from
0.20 USD/veh-km to 0.18 USD/veh-km for cars
(10% reduction), and from 0.76 USD/veh-km to
0.72 USD/veh-km for trucks (5.3% reduction).
Outcome 2: Improved road safety
Achieved
Primary Indicator: # of fatalities per 10,000 cars (2008
baseline = 13.9 target = 12)

Met: Number of fatalities per 10,000 cars was 7.9
in 2012.

Results Area 4: Accelerate Business Growth
Outcome 1: Sustained improvement in Business
environment

Lending: DPO series, Rural Development
project (approved FY05, closed FY11);
Electricity Market Support Project (closed in
FY10); Infrastructure Pre-Investment Facility
Project (closed in FY11).

Achieved

-- Primary Indicator: Selected business environment
indicators including:
59

-- “Paying Taxes” rank in Doing Business (2009 baseline
= 110. Target = improvement in ranking)

-- # of days required to import and export from Doing
Business (2009 baseline = 12 days to export, 14 days to
import. Target = reduction by 10%)
- “Access to finance” rating in BEEPS (2008 baseline =
55% of firms indicated a problem. Target = under 40%)

-Primary Indicator: Global Competitiveness Index (2010
baseline = rank 93, score 3.86. Target = improved rank
and score)

Met: "Paying Taxes" rank 33 – Doing
Business 2013 compared to 61 as per Doing
Business
2011.

Met: 9 days to export (25% reduction) and 10
days to import (29% reduction) –
Doing Business 2013

Non-lending: Upgrading
the National Standards and Quality
Infrastructure in the South Caucasus (FY11),
Trade and Development in the South
Caucasus (FY13); Georgia Competitive
Industries TA (FY13), Policy Note – Private
Sector Development (FY13), Policy Note –
Customs as Trade Facilitator (FY13).

IFC: Doing Business (annual); Paravani
HEP (FY10-13), Bank of Georgia (FY10-13),
Met: 30% of respondents to the 2013 BEEPS
Survey indicate "Access to Finance" as a moderate, Bank Republic (FY10-13), TBC Bank
(FY10-13), Standard Bank (FY13).
major, or very severe obstacle, vs. 55% in 2008.

Met: CGI 2013/2014 rank – 72, score – 4.15.

Outcome 2: Increased support to Small and Medium
Enterprises
-- Primary Indicator: Portfolio of SME credits extended
by IFC-supported banks. Target is to return to pre-crisis
(2007) level of $750 million.

Achieved

Met: IFC client banks held a portfolio of $795.6
mln in 41,733 loans extended to MSMEs as of
end-2012.

Outcome 3: Improved agriculture production, testing,
and sales
--Primary Indicator: Sales of enterprises supported by
rural development project (2008 baseline = 20 enterprises
supported. Target = double # of supported enterprises)

-- Primary Indicator: Increased exports of agriculture

Achieved

Met: Proxy indicator of increased income of
farmers and enterprises supported by the RDP
28.3% higher in June 2011 (compared to RDP
target of 10% increase).
60

Lending: DPO - focus on food certification,
Kakheti Roads; Rural Development, Avian
Influenza Control & Human Pandemic
Preparedness & Response Project (approved
FY06, closed FY12); Secondary and Local
Roads; Regional Development project.
Non-lending: High Level Agriculture

produce (2009 baseline=$286 million).

Met: Exports of Agriculture produce have
gradually increased and amounted to $450.6 mln in
2012 (compared to $400.5 mln in 2011 and $303.5
in 2010).

Workshop (FY10), Rural Investment Climate
Assessment (FY12); Fostering
Entrepreneurship in South Caucasus (FY13);
Policy Note – Improving Access to Finance
(FY13), Policy Note - Agriculture and Rural
Development (FY13)
IFC: Bank of Georgia (FY10-13), Bank
Republic (FY10-13), Standard bank (FY13),
Georgia Food Safety Improvement (FY11).

61

CPSCR Annex 2
Georgia CPSCR: WBG Portfolio Evolution, FY10-13
US$ Million
FY

IBRD/IDA Planned Operations
Operations

IDA

IBR
D

IBRD/IDA Approved Operations
Total

PreFY10

FY10

FY11

FY12

FY13

DPO I
East-West Highway I AF
East-West Highway III
Kakheti Regional Roads
Total FY10
DPO II 1/
Other Unallocated 2/

Total FY11
DPO III
Secondary & Local Roads
II
Regional Development I

85.0

85.0
5.0
56.0

61.0
40.0
40.0

23.0
147.0
40.0
210.0

0.0

50.0

Total FY12

80.0

DPO I (new series)

40.0

50.0

85.0
23.0
147.0
40.0
295.0
5.0
56.0

Operations

IDA

135.4
9.2
5.4

Regional & Municipal Infrastructure Development
Highways I & II
Secondary and Local Roads
Infrastructure Pre-Investment Facility
Education APLII
Public Financial Management
Electricity Market Development
DPO I
85.0
East-West Highway I AF
28.0
East-West Highway III
147.0
Kakheti Regional Roads
30.0
Total FY10
85.0 205.0
DPO II
40.0
10.0
Regional & Municipal
11.5
33.5
Infrastructure Development AF

27.2
19.4
52.3
1.1
8.1
3.0
5.6
85.0
28.0
147.0
30.0
290.0
50.0
45.0

Total FY11
DPO III
Secondary & Local Roads II

51.5
40.0
40.0

50.0

Regional Development I
East-West Highway III AF

43.0

40.0

Total

Undisbursed Amounts
Health Reform
Avian Influenza

61.0
40.0
40.0

130.0

IBR
D

IFC Investment

Total FY12

123.0

CG DPO I

60.0

62

43.5
30.0

95.0
40.0
70.0

60.0

60.0
43.0

90.0

213.0

60.0

Operations
Total FY09
Bank of Georgia III
Bank of Georgia
Swap I
BR Housing
TBC LT Facility
Rakeen Georgia

WBG
Total

Amount
238.6
100.0
4.0

374.0

15.0
70.0
49.6

Bank of Georgia
Bank Republic
TBC Bank

14.3
20.4
2.0

Total FY10
Bank of Georgia
Paravani HPP

36.7
12.5
40.5

SEAF Caucasus Fund
Infra Venture-CEI
Total FY11
Bank of Georgia
Bank Republic

10.0
2.0
65.0
28.5
3.5

TBC Bank
Tbilvino
Infra Venture-CEI
Paravani HPP
Total FY12

1.3
1.5
0.3
11.5
87.8

Bank of Georgia
GTFP

18.6

326.7

160.0

300.8

FY

IBRD/IDA Planned Operations
Operations
Secondary & Local Roads
II AF
Regional Development II

IBR
D

30.0
10.0

80.0
306.0

Total

Operations

IDA

IBR
D

IFC Investment
Total

30.0
40.0

40.0
300.0

50.0

Regional Development II
East-West Highway IV
CG DPO II

120.0
606.0
396.0

30.0
37.0
28.0

38.0
32.0

Total FY13 as of May 10, 2013
155.0
70.0
TOTAL FY10-13
414.5 408.5
Undisbursed from pre-FY10
TOTAL FUNDING FY10-13
1/ Original CPS allocation of US$45 million for DPO I-II, less DPO3 amount planned under CPSPR.
2/ Recorded as IDA only.
3/ Of which US$195 million in banking sector and US$56 million in real sector, including real estate and hydropower.
FY1013

Total FY13
TOTAL FY10-13
o/w original CPS planning

IDA

IBRD/IDA Approved Operations

63

30.0
75.0
60.0

225.0
823.0
135.4
958.4

Operations

WBG
Total

Amount

Bank Republic GTFP

3.4

TBC Bank GTFP
Standard Bank
Infrastructure-CEI
SB Real Estate
FINCA Georgia
Tetri Quidi
TBC Bank Rights
Issue
Total FY13
TOTAL FY10-133/
FY09 Commitments
TOTAL FY09-13

16.6
7.0
0.4
10.0
4.0
1.5
4.3
73.2
262.7
238.6
501.3

298.2
1085.7
374.0
1,459.7

CPSCR Annex 3
Georgia: Selected Macroeconomic and Financial Indicators 2009-2012

Indicators
Real GDP growth
Export growth
Current account deficit
Fiscal deficit
Inflation
External debt ratio to GDP
External debt ratio to exports
Commercial banks capital adequacy ratio
Commercial banks loan to deposit ratio
Commercial banks non-performing loans
Commercial banks liquidity ratio
Source: IMF/World Bank

Baseline
Year
Value

U/A
% per annum
% per annum
% of GDP
% of GDP
% year-end
%
%
year-end
year-end
year-end
year-end

64

2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2010
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009
2009

-3.8
-13.0
11.3
9.2
3.0
11.2
58.7
197.0
19.1
124.2
6.3
39.1

End-Program Results
Achieved
Period
Results
2010-12
6.5
2010-12
23.5
2012
11.5
2012
3.0
2012
-1.4
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012
2012

63.5
153
17.0
106.7
3.7
39.8

CPSCR Annex 4
Georgia’s Selected Global Competitiveness Rankings 2008-09 and 2012-13
Selected Indicators

Property rights
Efficiency of legal framework

Ranking
2008-09
2012-13
(134 countries) (144 countries)
109
131

Decile
2008-09
2012-13
8.1

9.1

Percentage change
of decile values
2008-2012
-11.8

100

98

7.5

6.8

+8.8

Quality of infrastructure

80

55

6.0

3.8

+36.0

Quality of primary education

81

91

6.0

6.3

-4.5

Quality of higher education

83

114

6.2

7.9

-27.8

114

127

8.5

8.8

-3.7

95

121

7.1

8.4

-18.5

111

141

8.3

9.8

-18.2

Professional management

68

92

5.1

6.4

-25.9

Financial services

94

100

7.0

6.9

+1.0

Local equity market

107

126

8.0

8.8

-9.6

Securities exchange regulation

103

119

7.7

8.3

-7.5

Firm-level technology absorption

108

116

8.1

8.1

0.0

Local suppliers performance

131

134

9.8

9.3

+4.8

97

116

7.2

8.1

-11.3

Spending on R&D

121

125

9.1

8.7

+3.9

University-industry collaboration

109

134

8.1

9.3

-14.4

90

77

6.7

5.4

+20.4

Intensity of local competition
Market dominance
Anti-monopoly policy

Capacity for innovation

OVERALL GCI

Source: Global Competitiveness Reports 2008-09 and 2012-13.

65

CPSCR Annex 5
Georgia: The Joint Needs Assessment
Mitigation of conflict impact. The International Financial Institutions (IFIs) responded promptly to
Georgia’s needs to mitigate the impact of the August 2008 armed conflict with Russia. The IMF extended
a US$750 million Stand-By Arrangement in September 2008. At the same time, the World Bank together
with the UN took the lead in preparing a three-year Joint Needs Assessment (JNA). The two institutions
organized a Donors’ Conference in October 2008 which adopted and over-subscribed the JNA program.
The Bank and the UN also monitored the implementation of the donors’-supported emergency and
recovery program of Georgia, issued JNA Progress Reports and organized follow-up Donors’
Conferences in June 2009 and June 2010.
The JNA identified Georgia’s priority needs, helped mobilize significant resources, and
underpinned donors’ medium-term programs. The JNA addressed Georgia’s immediate priorities: (i)
restoring investor and market confidence (economic management and budgeting, banking sector
viability); (ii) meeting social needs (return, relocation and resettlement of IDPs, social protection,
education, health, agriculture and livelihood, employment); and (iii) modernizing and developing
infrastructure (transport, energy, municipal and urban services, environment). The JNA recovery program
estimated 2009-11 external financing needs at US$3.15 billion (not including the Stand-By) and assigned
specific expenditure targets in each area. Donor pledges exceeded expectations, totaling US$3.7 billion
for the public sector and an additional US$800 million for the private sector, of which US$750 million for
the banking system. The IFIs pledged US$2.4 billion, of which US$880 million (36.7 percent) from the
WBG. The three largest pledges from the US (US$1.0 billion), EBRD (US$927 million) and the WBG
represented three-quarters of the total amount pledged at the conference. JNA Progress Reports in June
2009 and June 2010 monitored implementation, refined priorities and actions, and updated sector
allocations.
JNA implementation was exemplary. The last JNA review of June 2010 concluded that the
implementation of the recovery and reconstruction program was on track: donors respected pledges, the
pace of disbursements was brisk, and absorption of investment by the economy was strong. Over the
October 2008-March 2010 period donor commitments amounted to US$2.5 billion for the public sector
and US$673 million for the banking sector, against JNA projected needs of US$2.2 billion and US$700
million, respectively. The JNA process provided the donor community with a strong institutional
framework for coordination and harmonization of assistance programs, which continues to this day.
The World Bank Group contribution to JNA implementation went beyond financing. The scope and
design of the WBG program were consistent with the JNA and addressed the economic and social impact
of the crisis. The Bank and IFC respected JNA pledges, reflected changed country circumstances and
needs in the last year of the ongoing FY06-09 Country Strategy and the new CPS for FY10-13, and
coordinated WBG assistance with the other donors. CPS objectives and results areas were well aligned
with JNA priorities and factored in the lessons of JNA implementation, while at the same time taking into
account challenges for longer-term sustainable economic growth. The 2010 IEG report on The World
Bank Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis highlighted the fast, relevant and high quality
WBG response to Georgia’s crisis. The IEG report stated that “The Bank played a large and constructive
role in the international response to Georgia’s twin crises. The large volume of the Bank’s financial
66

assistance was well planned and implemented […] But the Bank’s role went well beyond lending, as
evidenced by its leadership of the joint needs assessment and organization of the donors’ meeting. The
Bank’s internal organization and expertise and its time-tested convening power in leading multi-donor
missions to assess reconstruction needs was exactly what was needed in Georgia after August 2008.”
(IEG 2010 report, p.49). The contribution of the Bank was recognized in March 2010, when the Georgia
JNA was one of 12 winners of the award for “Improving the Lives of People in Europe and Central Asia”.
JNA implementation provided lessons for future external assistance: (i) budget support can be highly
efficient in channeling financing for social and infrastructure spending and counter-cyclical economic
stimulus, provided the budget is macro-economically sound and socially responsible; (ii) support for
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) must be addressed holistically, to include livelihood, social
protection and information on rights, and to involve IDPs in all decisions that affect them; (iii)
infrastructure spending needs to take into account maintenance and environmental safeguards, and ensure
a proper balance between primary and secondary infrastructure; (iv) the financial sector needs technical
assistance in addition to financing to promote local currency intermediation and lending, and develop
non-bank financial activities; and (v) institutional change requires continuous donor support and
coordination, and benefits from an open approach to information disclosure.

67

CPSCR Annex 6
Country Survey Selected Findings
Top Five Responses of Country Survey Respondents
Questions
1

st

2nd

3d

4th

5th

Georgia’s
development
priorities

Education 43%

Economic growth
31%

Jobs/employment
30%

Public sector
governance 23%

Private sector
development 23%

Poverty reduction
vehicles

Economic growth
56%

Jobs/employment
43%

Agriculture/rural
dev. 39%

Education 37%

Private sector dev.
33%

Focusing Bank
resources

Education 36%

Agriculture/rural dev.
28%

Public sector
governance 25%

Transport
infrastructure 23%

Economic growth
21%

WBG greatest
value

Financing
investment 69%

Policy based budget
support 45%

Technical assistance
20%

Policy advice 17%

Mobilizing third
party financial
resources 13%
Capacity building
13%

Most effective
WB instruments

Investment
lending 69%

TA 35%

Policy based budget
support 32%

Capacity building
27%

Knowledge
products and
services 19%

Focusing Bank
research

Education 42%

Private sector
development 34%

Public sector
governance 30%

Economic growth
29%

Foreign direct
investment 19%
Job creation 19%

Increasing WB
value

Better quality of
experts 34%

More innovative
financial products
29%

Reducing
complexity of
financing 27%

Reaching more
outside
government 25%

More innovative
knowledge services
25%

WB effectiveness
(rating out of 10
maximum)

Transport
infrastructure 8.5

Municipal, urban and
regional development
7.5

Water and sanitation
7.5

Tourism 7.4

Economic growth
7.2

Rating Bank
knowledge
services (10
maximum)

Relevant global
good practices 7.9

Feasible
recommendation 7.6

Accessible work 7.6

Relevance to
Georgia’s dev.
Priorities 7.5

Usefulness 7.5

Perceptions
(rating out of 10
maximum)

WB treats clients
with respect 8.5

WB contributes to
institutional capacity
8.3

WB teams and visits
are well coordinated
8.0

WB lending terms
are reasonable 8.0

Continuity and
effectiveness of
support to
implementation
7.8-7.9

WB as effective
development
partner

Collaboration
with Government
8.5

Straightforwardness
and honesty 8.2

Follo through over
time 8.1

Collaboration
with other donors
7.6

Staff accessibility
7.4

Source: Country Survey (World Bank, Tbilisi, June 2013).

68

Annex 3: Donor Table
Currency: Thousand USD

69

Annex 4: Consultations on the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
The World Bank Group organized a series of consultations (November 2013- February 2014) to
seek views on its proposed Country Partnership Strategy for Georgia for 2014-2017. The
consultations were held with representatives of civil society, think-tanks, private sector, donor
organizations and government officials at all levels. These meetings provided a platform for the
World Bank Group (WBG) to tap into the experience and opinion of a broad range of
stakeholders, and to hear their ideas on how the WBG can help Georgia achieve its development
objectives. A draft of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was shared with audiences before
meeting with them, in order to inform the discussions.
OVERALL COMMENTS:
 Participants spoke of the WBG’s draft CPS as being comprehensive and adequate.
 Regional development initiatives of the government, supported by the WBG, were
largely praised by all participants in terms of creating jobs (if only temporary), paving the
way to private investments, attracting visitors to the regions’ cultural heritage sites and
improving infrastructure.
 WBG’s program is well anchored in the Government’s Socioeconomic Development
Strategy-2020 released recently.
 The government’s strategy has its risks and opportunities and requires close cooperation
among various state agencies. The WBG can play an important role in ensuring close
communication between government institutions.
 Proper donor coordination is essential, since many priorities identified in the CPS
coincided with the priorities of other donors.
 The WBG and other donors should closely monitor their assistance to Georgia and
condition this (for example on better transparency and disclosure, strong monitoring and
evaluation system in place). The World Bank’s approach is particularly important, as one
of the most reputable international organizations.
 Participants expressed interest in the lessons learned from the previous program, and how
those were incorporated in the new CPS.

SECTOR-SPECIFIC COMMENTS:
 Private Sector Development:


Participants emphasized the importance of ensuring a continuous policy dialogue
on private sector led growth.



Participants asked about the ways to influence and attract investment (mostly,
FDI). Questions were asked about the stronger industries from the investment
70










perspective and what were the plans in terms of establishing the National
Competitiveness Council.
It was underscored that private sector should continue to be the main source for
job creation, at the same time paying attention to skills development. Importance
of vocational education was singled out. The intention of the government to use
the existing system of colleges for tackling the labor market mismatch was also
touched upon.
Lack of qualified labor, especially in the regions was identified as one of the
fundamental challenges faced by the private sector. Need for vocational education
and skills development remains a priority. There is a possibility of funding
employee training by private sector itself.
Access to finance remains one of the main issues.
When addressing efficiency and competitiveness, participants indicated that it
would be important to learn from the experience of other countries that effectively
manage their economies.
Private sector was not sufficiently addressed by the draft strategy in terms of SME
development. There is a need to have this component more detailed in the
proposed CPS.
Importance of two recent instruments - newly established institutions for
supporting the SME development and innovative technology transfer - was noted.

 Skills development:


Need for skills development and skills mismatch was identified as one of the most
pressing issues in the country, in general. It was emphasized that vocational
training should be demand-driven; the question was whether the WBG or other
donors performed an analysis of what vocations were most in demand.

 Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement:




The CPS is optimistic about the possible DCFTA impact, especially in terms of
export and investment prospects. Georgia needs to be prepared to exploit this
opportunity. However, DCFTA expectations should not be exaggerated. Georgia
does not have competitive products that can be exported straight away. However,
in the longer term, the country’s exports base will need to grow.
DCFTA is a great opportunity for SME development in the long-term perspective,
but in the short-term it could exert certain pressure over these enterprises, due to
introduction of new regulations and requirements. Participants requested the
WBG to help with ‘smoothening’ this process.

 Regional Development: While participants acknowledged the WBG’s support to regional
development, requests were made for more in-depth engagement in tourism sector
development (possibly through a stand-alone project). The WBG was calso called upon to
help the Government address regional disparities more extensively.
71

 Public-Private Partnerships: Importance of knowledge transfer related to PPP was noted.
The project by Swiss Development Agency is focused on inclusive dialogue, and the Swiss
experience was distinguished as a very useful in terms of building private-public
partnerships.
 Agriculture:


Economic development greatly depends on agriculture development and in this
particular sector, access to finance is a problem. Very few agricultural projects were
implemented through funding from local banks, most of them were financed by
international institutions such as IFC, EBRD, OPEC or through FDI.



The government’s initiative to subsidize agriculture oriented companies is welcome.



The intention of the EU to support creation of cooperatives through NGOs, did not
seem reasonable without involving the private sector.



CPS approach to create jobs outside agriculture in the regions is noteworthy.

 Infrastructure and Transport:







Participants emphasized the need for continued construction of secondary roads
through for improving infrastructure and connectivity in the regions.



Importance of having proper management and monitoring system for measuring the
impact was noted as crucial.



Lack of institutional capacity is one of the reasons for Georgian companies being
mostly subcontractors and not contractors of the projects financed by the World Bank
or other donors. Strengthening of Georgian firms is required, which could be done
through announcing small size tenders.

Education:


Participants were satisfied to see that the draft CPS had highlighted the issue of preschool education. They expressed concern about the insufficient number of
kindergartens in regions, which were identified as priority issues in need of attention.



Introduction of universal preschool care is a huge burden under the conditions of
limited resources of local self-government and needs a thorough assessment.



Preschool and general school education standards and expediency of implementing
good practices is essential.



In addition, there is a need for dialogue between employers and higher education
institutions including vocational education.

Health and social protection:


Access to universal health coverage and the quality of this coverage (as opposed to
the number of beneficiaries) is important.

72





Social protection of vulnerable groups remains an issue. It was suggested to keep the
term “conflict-affected” people in official documents, especially when referring to
people living in border villages, since they have to bear many difficulties. Issues of
gasification and potable water problems in border villages, and need for strengthening
public service delivery were raised.

Gender:


Participants noted the employment problems faced by women – applications rejected
because of the fact of having a family, a pregnancy, etc. Need for formalization of
female employment was underlined.

The World Bank Group team addressed the discussion points raised by the participants of
consultations and pledged that it would continue its dialogue with the donors, civil society,
private sector and the government to get greater clarity on what would work best in the country
considering available resources. The WBG team also emphasized that the next phase of support
would see an enhanced focus on ensuring the quality of implementation on the ground.

73

Annex 5: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

74

Annex 6: Operations Portfolio

75

Annex 7: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of February 28, 2014
(In USD Millions)
Committed
Clie nt

Commitme nt Fiscal Ye ar

Loan

Equity

Quasi
Equity *

Disbursed Outstanding

GT /RM**

Total
IFC

Total
Part

Loan

Equity

Quasi GT /RM*
Equity *
*

Total
IFC

Total
Part

2012

BOG Holdings Plc

-

22

-

-

22

-

-

22

-

-

22

-

2000/ 03/ 09/ 10/ 11/ 12/ 13/ 14

Bank of Georgia

25

-

-

9

34

-

25

-

-

9

34

-

2008/ 09/ 10/ 12/ 13/ 14

Bank Republic

46

-

7

3

56

-

26

-

7

3

36

-

2011/ 12/ 13

CEI

-

5

-

-

5

-

-

5

-

-

5

-

2013

Finca Georgia

4

-

-

0

4

-

4

-

-

-

4

-

2011/ 12

GUEN

41

-

-

-

41

12

41

-

-

-

41

12

2013

KSB Georgia

-

-

7

-

7

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

Rakeen Georgia

23

8

-

-

31

-

23

8

-

-

31

-

2013

SB Real Estate

10

-

-

-

10

-

5

-

-

-

5

-

2011

SEAF Caucasus

-

9

-

-

9

-

-

7

-

-

7

-

1998/ 2000/ 02/ 05/ 06/ 07/ 08/ 09/ 12/ 13/ 14 T BC Bank

-

36

19

7

61

-

-

36

19

5

60

-

1999

T bilComBank

0

-

-

-

0

-

0

-

-

-

0

-

2008

T bilisi Central

8

-

-

-

8

-

8

-

-

-

8

-

2012

T bilvino

1

-

-

-

1

-

1

-

-

-

1

-

2013

T etri Qudi

2

-

-

-

2

2

-

-

-

2

-

160

80

33

19

291

12

135

77

26

17

254

12

Total Portfolio

* Quasi Equity includes both loan and
** Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.

76

Annex 8: Proposed Lending
FY15

FY14

DPO-3
Irrigation & Land
Market Dev’t
Energy Transmission
Grid
Regional &
Municipal Infra. 2
Secondary and Local
Roads 3
Sub-Total
IBRD/IDA
Financial Markets
Real Sector
Sub-Total IFC

IBRD

IDA

70

22.8

60

DPO-1 (st CPS
Area)
DPO-1 (2nd CPS
Area)
Innovation & ICT

30

Regional Dev’t

50

FY16
IBRD
50
50
40
95

DPO-2 (1st CPS
Area)
DPO-2 (2nd CPS
Area)
Secondary & Local
Roads 3 Add. Fin.
East-West Highway

FY17
IBRD
50

50

DPO-3 (1st CPS
Area)
DPO-3 (2nd CPS
Area)
Infrastructure

140

Agriculture

50

IBRD
60
60
80
60

75
235

72.8

IFC
40-50
60-80
100-130

235

Financial Markets
Real Sector

IFC
20-40
20-30
40-70

77

290

Financial Markets
Real Sector

IFC
30-40
20-30
50-70

260

Financial Markets
Real Sector

IFC
40-50
20-30
60-80

40°E

42°E

44°E

G EORG IA

44°N

44°N

R U S S I A N

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
AUTONOMOUS OBLAST CENTER

F E D E R A T I O N

AUTONOMOUS REPUBLIC CENTERS

To
Soai

NATIONAL CAPITAL

GEORGIA

RIVERS

Gagra

MAIN ROADS

u

RAILROADS

c

AUTONOMOUS OBLAST BOUNDARY

a

ABKHAZIA

s

Suhumi

da

Oni
Ambrolauri

ni

land

Zugdidi

i

al

Low

Tsk
en

Sea

o

Dzvari
uri

Ing

Senaki

Black

s
M

hi
Ochamchira

AUTONOMOUS REPUBLIC BOUNDARIES
To
Vladikavkaz

Tkvarceli

k

isc
k

Kol

u

Mestia

Poti

Rioni

Tkibuli
Kutaisi

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Mqinvartsveri
(5047 m)

u

Kazbegi

n

t

South
Sout
h
Osset ia
Ossetia

Sachkhere
ilk
Kvir

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

a

Chinvali

i

n

Iori

a

Rio

C

s

Samtredia

42°N
Khashuri

Ozurgeti

Telavi
Lagodehi

a
ni
za

AADJ JAARRAA

Al

Mtskheta

Kobuleti

Batumi

42°N

Akhmeta

Gori
Mtkv
ari (K
ura)

Gurjaani

T'BLISI
Akhaltsikhe
Rustavi

Iori

To
Zagatala

Marneuli
TsiteliTskaro

Ahalkalaki
Kazreti
Ninocminda

Mt

kva

To
Trabzon

ri

Io

ri

(Ku

ra)

T U R K E Y

To
Yevlax

0

10

60 Kilometers

40

20

30

40

50 Miles

To
Erzurum

A R M E N I A

To
Erzurum

JULY 2012

To
Armavir

40°E

42°E

44°E

Lake
Sevan

Mingechevir
Reservoir

AZERBAIJAN
46°E

IBRD 33410R

0

20

