Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 82501-NG

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
FOR THE PERIOD FY2014-FY2017
March 13, 2014

Nigeria Country Management Unit
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official Duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report was September 20, 2011.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Exchange Rate Effective as of 2014
SDR 1
=
US$
US$
=
Naira
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AfDB
AMCON
ARC
ATA
CADP
CAF
CBN
CCT
CPS
CPSPR
CDD
CSO
DFID
DISCO
DPO
DMO
DRM-CC
DSA
EBP
ECA
ECOWAS
EFCC
EITI
FCT
FDI
FGN
FIRS
FMOE
FMOH
GEF
GEM
GENCO
GER
GFDRR
GHG
GIFMIS

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Asset Management Corporation of Nigeria
African Risk Capacity
Agriculture Transformation Actin Plan
Commercial Agriculture Development Project
Country Assistance Framework
Central Bank of Nigeria
Conditional Cash Transfer
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report
Community Driven Development
Civil Society Organizations
Department for International Development
Distribution Company
Development Policy Operations
Debt Management Office
Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change Operation
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Energy Business Plan
Excess Crude Account
Economic Community for West African States
Economic and Financial Crimes Commission
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Federal Capital Territory
Foreign Direct Investment
Federal Government of Nigeria
Federal Inland Revenue Service
Federal Ministry of Education
Federal Ministry of Health
Global Environment Fund
Growth and Employment in Markets
Generation Company
Gross Enrollment Rate
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
Greenhouse Gas
Governments Integrated Financial Management and Information System
i

GIZ
GMS
GPE
GPF
HDI
HNLSS
IBRD
ICA
ICT
IDA
IEG
IFC
IGR
IHP+
IMF
IPP
IPSAS
ITAS
ITN
LGA
LSMS-ISA
MDAs
MDGs
MIC
MIGA
MW
NBET
NBS
NCS
NDHS
NEGIP
NEGSR
NEITTI
NER
NEWMAP
NHIS
NIIMP
NIRP
NMRC
NNPC
NPOPC
NPV
NSWF
PAD
PDP
PEFA
PEMFAR
PER

Gesellschaft fuer Internationale Zusammenarbeit
Gas Master Plan
Global Partnership for Education
Governance Partnership Facility
Human Development Indicators
Harmonized Nigeria Living Standard Survey
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Investment Climate Assessment
Information and Communication Technology
International Development Association
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
Internally Generated Revenue
International Health Partnership
International Monetary Fund
Independent Power Producers
International Public Sector Accounting Standards
Integrated Time and Attendance System
Insecticide Treated Net
Local Government Authority
Living Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture
Ministries, Departments and Agencies
Millennium Development Goals
Middle Income Country
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Mega Watts
Nigeria Bulk Electricity Trader
Nigeria Bureau of Statistics
Nigeria Customs Service
Nigeria Demographic and Health Surveys
Nigeria Electricity and Gas Improvement Project
Nigeria Employment and Growth Study Report
Nigeria Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Net Enrollment Rate
Nigeria Erosion Management and Watershed Management Project
Nigeria Health Insurance Scheme
National Integrated Infrastructure Master Plan
Nigeria Industrial Revolution Plan
Nigeria Mortgage Refinancing Company
Nigeria National Petroleum Company
National Population Commission
Net Present Value
National Sovereign Wealth Fund
Project Appraisal Document
People Democratic Party
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment
Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review
Public Expenditure Review
ii

PFM
P4R
PHCN
PPP
PRG
RAMP
SBMC
SCPZs
SDPO
SEEFOR
SEPIC
SHPIC
SME
SPARC
SOML
SSA
SURE-P
TA
UNDP
UNICEF
UNHDI
USAID
WB
WBG
WDI
WDR
YESSO

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

Public Financial Management
Program For Results Financing
Power Holding Company Nigeria
Public Private Partnership
Partial Risk Guarantee
Rural Access and Mobility Projects
School Board Management Committees
Staple Crop Processing Zones
State Development Policy Operation
State Employment and Expenditure for Results
Nigeria State Education Program Investment Credit
Nigeria States Health Program Investment Credit
Small and Medium Enterprises
State Partnership for Accountability, Responsiveness and Capacity
Saving One Million Lives
Sub-Saharan Africa
Subsidy Reinvestment and Empowerment Program
Transformation Agenda
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Human Development Index
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank
World Bank Group
World Development Index
World Development Report
Youth Employment and Social Support Operation

World Bank
Makhtar Diop
Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly
Indira Konjhodzic

IFC
Jean Philippe Prosper
Saran Kebet-Koulibaly
Solomon Quaynor

iii

MIGA
Michel Wormser
Ravi Vish
Stephan Dreyhaupt

Acknowledgements:
The Nigeria CPS was prepared with the collaboration of a core team who worked closely with
the Task Team Leaders and the Country Director: Amos Abu, Andrew Dabalen, Ayodeyi
Oluwole Odutolu, Bayo Awosemusi, Benjamin Loevinson, Caroline Sage, Erik Magnus
Fernstrom, Francisca Ayodeji Akala, Frederick Yankey, Foluso Okunmadewa, Frank Armand D.
Douamba, Gravette Deanne Brown, Irajen Appasamy, John Litwack, Jens Kromann Kristensen,
Katherine Bain, Michael Wong, Mohammed Dalil Essakali, Raffaello Cervigni, Sateh Chafic ElArnaout, Seenithamby Manoharan, Sheu Salau, Stephen Mink, Adetunji Oredipe, Ogo-Oluwatoyin
Jagha (Task Team Leader for the CPS FY10-13 Completion Report), Olatunji Ahmed, Vasco
Molini, Abiodun Elufioye, and Minh Thi Hoang Trinh. The Team also wants to thank the
Economic Management Implementation Team (EMIT), chaired by the Coordinating Minister of
Economy and the Honorable Minister of Finance, Dr. Ngozi Okonjo Iweala, and the Director of
the Department for International Economic Relations, Mr. Mohammed Haruna, and other Senior
Officials of the Federal Ministry of Finance for the close collaboration on the program and
during the consultations. The consultations with many non-Governmental organizations, private
sector organizations, the media, and other Development Partners provided very valuable
feedback, which is incorporated in the document.

iv

FY2014-2017 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................... vii
I.

Introduction ............................................................................................................................................ 1

II. Country Context .................................................................................................................................... 1
II.A. Social And Political Context ............................................................................................................ 1
II.B. Recent Macroeconomic Performance And Medium-Term Outlook ................................................ 2
II.C. The Poverty Challenges ................................................................................................................... 5
II.D. Key Constraints To Increasing Shared Prosperity And Accelerating Poverty Reduction .............. 9
II.E. Opportunities For Growth, Increasing Shared Prosperity And Accelerating Poverty Reduction .. 13
III. Government Program And Medium-Term Strategy ............................................................................. 14
IV. World Bank Group Partnership Strategy .............................................................................................. 20
IV.A. Lessons From CPS Completion Report, IEG Evaluation And Stakeholder Consultations ........... 20
IV.B. Overview Of World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy ................................................... 21
IV.C. Engagement Areas Supported By Lending And Non-Lending Activities ..................................... 24
First Strategic Cluster: Federally Led Structural Reforms For Growth And Jobs ............................. 24
Second Strategic Cluster: Social Service Delivery At State Level For Greater Social Inclusion ... 32
Foundational/Cross-cutting Cluster: Governance And Public Sector Management........................ 37
IV.D. Implementing The FY2014-2017 Country Partnership Strategy ................................................... 41
Financing Sources ........................................................................................................................... 41
Portfolio Management ..................................................................................................................... 43
Financial Management And Procurement Systems ......................................................................... 44
Monitoring And Evaluation And Advancing The Science Of Delivery .......................................... 45
Partnerships ..................................................................................................................................... 45
V. Managing Risks .................................................................................................................................... 46
Annex 1: Results Matrix ............................................................................................................................. 49
Annex 2: Nigeria - Selected Indicators Of Bank Portfolio Performance And Management ..................... 60
Annex 3: Nigeria - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA-GRANTS) ............................................................. 61
Annex 4: Statement Of IFC’s Committed And Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio .................. 62
Annex 5: Strengthening Statistics In Nigeria - A Suggested Path Forward................................................ 63
Annex 6: Governance Approach ................................................................................................................. 67
Annex 7: FY10-13 Joint Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report of Nigeria ............................ 70
Annex 8: Country Assistance Framework for Nigeria .............................................................................. 113

v

List of Boxes, Figures and Tables
Box 1: Poverty and inequality trends in Nigeria: 2010-2013 ....................................................................... 6
Box 2: The CPS approach to the Northern Nigeria..................................................................................... 23
Box 3: The Joint Bank Group Energy Business Plan for Nigeria (EBP) .................................................... 26
Figure 1: Simulations on Growth and Poverty Reduction ............................................................................ 7
Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators ......................................................................................................... 5
Table 2: Regional Poverty Estimates in 2003-2004 and 2009-2010: .......................................................... 7
Table 3: HNP Outcomes and Service Delivery in Nigeria 2003-2013 ......................................................... 9
Table 4: Proposed Lending Program ......................................................................................................... 42
Table 5: CPS Indicative Knowledge Services Program, FY2014-2015 ..................................................... 43

vi

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
The Nigeria Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covers the period FY2014-2017 and
is fully aligned with the goals of Nigeria’s development agenda, Vision 20:2020, and its
medium-term strategy for realizing that vision, the Transformation Agenda 2011-2015. The
CPS represents the World Bank Group’s (WBG) program under the Country Assistance
Framework (CAF) developed by Nigeria’s partners to coordinate interventions based on each
partner’s comparative advantage in order to deliver rapid results. With this strategy, Nigeria is
officially entering blend status, having been declared creditworthy for IBRD financing in FY13
and having exceeded the IDA operational cut-off.
Nigeria is One of Africa’s Potential Economic Powerhouses
2.
With its strong fundamentals, including consistent and strong growth since 1999,
Nigeria qualifies as one of the continent’s potential economic powerhouses. Nigeria is the
most populous country of the continent (171 million people in 2012) and the second largest
economy after South Africa. Ranking 13rd in the world, Nigeria is Africa’s largest oil producer
and also holds the second highest proven reserves in the continent after Libya. After decades of
military rule, the country has successfully engaged on the path of democracy since 1999, and
since then has enjoyed consistent and strong growth. All of these factors make Nigeria one of the
continent’s potential economic powerhouses.
3.
Responsible macroeconomic policies have supported a high degree of economic
stability. The introduction of the fiscal reserve Excess Crude Account (ECA) in 2004 has
facilitated the implementation of countercyclical fiscal policy, including the financing of an
effective stimulus package during the world financial crisis of 2008-2009. Since 2011, the
Government has actively pursued fiscal consolidation, and monetary policy has been
tightened along with the recovery of the banking sector from the crisis of 2009. Inflation is
also slowing down.
To Unlock its Full Potential, Nigeria Needs to Tackle Some Critical Development Challenges
4.
So far, with rapid population growth, Nigeria has made slow progress in reducing
poverty. With a median age of 14 and population growth at close to 3 percent, Nigeria faces the
challenge of providing jobs for its teeming youth population. Despite the robust growth over the
last decade, rapid population growth combined with increasing inequality hampered faster
poverty reduction. The poverty (consumption per capita) declined from 48 percent in 2004 to 46
percent in 2010 using the adult equivalent methodology. The percentage of Nigerians living in
extreme poverty (US$1.25 per capita per day, purchasing power parity adjusted) declined from
64 to 63 percent. Given population growth, this implies that the number of extreme poor
increased from 86 million in 2004 to 100 million in 2010.
5.
The key challenge facing Nigeria is therefore how to leverage its oil resources to
promote sustained inclusive growth, reduce poverty, inequality and unemployment.
Nigeria is highly dependent on oil, which makes the country vulnerable to commodity price
volatility. Nigeria needs to diversify its economy to achieve sustainable inclusive growth and
accelerate the creation of jobs. Nigeria has been growing at 6 to 8 percent annually over the past
decade but will need to achieve even higher growth rates to make a dent in poverty. This will
require effective macroeconomic management, socio-political stability, the provision of key
infrastructure, structural reforms to reduce impediments to diversified growth, and more
effective efforts to achieve social inclusion. Given the large regional, social, and economic
vii

disparities and conflict and insecurity in some parts of the country, achieving these
objectives requires a resolute and differentiated approach.
The Government has Formulated a Clear Vision, and is Implementing its Transformation
Agenda to Address the above Challenges
6.
The Vision 20:2020 and its medium-term implementation strategy focus on
promoting sustainable growth and welfare improvements. Specifically, the Vision 20:2020
aims to: (a) optimize the country’s human and natural resource potential to achieve rapid
economic growth and (b) translate that growth into equitable social development for all citizens.
The medium-term strategy for achieving these goals, the Transformation Agenda, aims at: (a)
creating a sufficient number of jobs to address the protracted problems of unemployment and
long-term poverty; (b) laying the foundation for a robust and inclusive growth of the
Nigerian economy; and (c) improving and sustaining the well-being of all Nigerians
regardless of their personal circumstances and location. The Government is implementing
critical programs to: (i) address the structural problems of access to power and to finance; (ii)
unlock agricultural potential; (iii) create opportunities for job creation; and (iv) implement
some safety net programs. Preliminary achievements are showing results illustrated by the
dynamism of some sectors such as ICT and e-commerce, the innovation of young entrepreneurs,
and an increased interest in Nigeria by international investors and the Nigerian diaspora.
7.
The authorities are continuing with efforts to strengthen governance. Great strides are
being made in introducing a treasury single account, an integrated financial management system,
increasing transparency of revenue allocations, and improving access to information about the
budget. Reforms have also been announced and initiated in customs, tax administration and
pension administration. International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) have been
introduced at all levels of government under the federal government leadership. While this is
work in progress, the reform marks an important milestone, given the strong federal impetus on
state-level governance reforms in this area. At state level, the picture varies from state to state,
with some states making headway in public financial management and citizen consultation.
The World Bank Group Program
8.
In support of these objectives, the CPS program is structured around three strategic
clusters: (a) promoting diversified growth and job creation by reforming the power sector,
enhancing agricultural productivity, and increasing access to finance; (b) improving the quality
and efficiency of social service delivery at the state level to promote social inclusion; and (c)
strengthening governance and public sector management, with gender equity and conflict
sensitivity as essential elements of governance. WBG support to structural reform agendas for
diversified growth and jobs focuses specifically on: (a) increasing installed power generation and
transmission capacity and improving the efficiency and governance of electricity delivery; (b)
boosting agricultural productivity, improving farmers’ linkages with agro-processors, and
scaling up resilience to current and future climate variability; and (c) increasing the supply of
long-term financing for the housing sector, expanding financing opportunities for SMEs, and
strengthening the ability of Development Finance Institutions to mobilize private finance for
key sectors of the economy.
Principles of Engagement
9.
The WBG program is based on a country diagnosis, strong demand by federal and state
authorities, and WBG comparative advantage. The program seeks to strike the right balance
between actions to strengthen the enabling environment and direct interventions, recognizing that
viii

all activities need to be assessed from a governance perspective. This should lead to: more
selectivity; a more candid recognition of risks; better identification of reform potential; and
performance-based approaches rather than funding inputs to leverage changes in systems and
incentives. It will also seek to enhance the role that citizens can and should play in shaping the
reform agenda. Both the Government and WBG recognize the importance of focusing on results.
Therefore, improving information systems, feedback loops, adaptation and learning will become
key features of the new strategy, in both the existing portfolio and new operations.
10. The strategy recognizes that the WBG’s impact derives not only from its financial
resources, which are small compared to the country’s own resources, but also from its
knowledge work, its deep engagement with federal and state authorities, its understanding
of the nuances of local contexts, and its ability to mobilize other partners. The CPS will
support demonstrational and catalytic interventions in areas where: (a) the WBG has a real
comparative advantage vis-à-vis other partners; and (b) there is high likelihood of durable impact
on poverty reduction and of replication without additional donor funding.
11. The strategy foresees close cooperation among development partners to enhance the
effectiveness and transformational impact of national efforts. The WBG will collaborate with
CAF partners to leverage external resources and enhance the role of knowledge partnerships in
building capacity at the state level, furthering the federal Government’s reform agenda, and
developing platforms for engagement in new areas such as job creation, socio-economic
development in the North, and urbanization.
Risks and Mitigating Factors
12. The strategy faces several risks and has built-in flexibility to allow for appropriate
responses. Risks to the CPS implementation include economic volatility related to the pace of
global recovery; a reversal of capital inflows; lower oil prices and oil production; less reform or
more spending in the lead up to the 2015 elections; in-country violence and insecurity; the
opposition of vested interests to reform; and instability in the sub-region. The strategy therefore
has built-in flexibility to allow for appropriate responses to changing country circumstances and
evolving development opportunities. In particular, the WBG program has been set flexibly to
allow for mid-term adjustment to take into account additional FY2014-FY2015 diagnostic work
and engagement with the new Government in 2015.

ix

FY2014-2017 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY2010-2013 for the Federal Republic
Nigeria was updated in the CPS Progress Report in September 2011. The CPS was aligned
with the country’s Seven Point Agenda and the Vision 20:2020 and the priorities identified by
the earlier administration, and endorsed by the current administration. The CPS, prepared in
partnership with the Department for International Development (DFID), the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID) and the African Development Bank (AfDB),
focused on four broad themes: (a) mitigating the impact of the global economic crisis; (b)
improving governance, (c) maintaining non-oil growth; and (d) promoting human development.
2.
The new Nigeria CPS covers the period FY2014-FY2017 and introduces a change in
the country’s borrowing status. Nigeria was declared creditworthy for IBRD financing in
FY2013 and is officially entering blend status in FY2014.
3.
The new CPS reflects the World Bank Group’s commitment to exploit synergies to
generate maximum development impact through innovative solutions, and to leverage
WBG knowledge and technical expertise through other partners’ resources. The CPS has
been developed and will be implemented in close coordination with development partners, as
articulated in the Country Assistance Framework (CAF – Annex 8). The CAF is the common
strategic approach of Nigeria’s development partners in support of the Government’s
development plans.
4.
The overarching objective of the CPS is to support the Government’s goals of laying
the foundation for socially and regionally inclusive growth with a specific focus on reducing
poverty and increasing shared prosperity. The CPS builds upon two key Government
documents – the Vision 20:2020 and the Transformation Agenda. The Vision 20:2020 sets out
Nigeria’s long term development objectives. The Transformation Agenda represents a mediumterm strategy (2011-2015) for operationalizing Vision 20:2020 and its 2013 mid-term review
provides information on the performance of all sectors.

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT
II.A. Social and Political Context
5.
Nigeria is a diverse country with major opportunities and complex challenges.
Consisting of thirty-six states and the Federal Capital Territory, the Federation is divided into six
geo-political zones. With more than 400 ethnolinguistic groups, it also features significant
contrasts in terms of economic and social outcomes: robust economic growth and yet modest
poverty reduction; dynamic urban growth centers and isolated rural areas; and widening social
and income disparities in the context of abundant natural and human resources.
6.
Oil has been the dominant source of government revenue since the 1970s, and has
been at the heart of the political debate as well as a major driver of the creation of new states in

1

the Federation. Nigeria shares governance challenges with other developing countries with a
large amount of natural resource revenue.
7.
Nigeria’s democracy is deepening but, like other young democracies, it is also facing
challenges. The combination of abundant oil wealth and nation building has produced a durable
yet contested federal system, a multi-party democracy, and important forms of institution
building (increasing separation of powers, more autonomy of the judiciary, gradual improvement
in electoral processes and a proliferation of civil society organizations). The last general election
in 2011 received high praise for being well-managed, despite some post-election violence in
northern Nigeria.
8.
States in Nigeria operate with a high degree of autonomy. States and local governments
in Nigeria control more than half of the nation’s revenue and are responsible for the provision of
services that directly influence growth and poverty, such as primary and secondary education,
health care, water and sanitation, rural infrastructure, and community services. The high degree
of autonomy provides states, particularly those with dynamic and progressive leadership, an
opportunity to move ahead on their own. This autonomy, however, also poses a challenge to
building national consensus across different levels of government, including in the areas of
macroeconomic stability, prioritizing public resource allocation, and meeting minimal national
standards in service delivery.
9.
While most Nigerians live in peaceful coexistence, contentious relations among
different groups have arisen in several parts of the country. Since independence in 1960,
Nigeria’s political history has been turbulent, punctuated by periods of urban riots and political
confrontations. Currently, some of the most significant challenges include: (a) the insurgency
of a violent group popularly known as Boko Haram in the North East, where service delivery is
the weakest and poverty rates are the highest (since June 2013, the three northeastern states,
Adamawa, Yobe and Borno, have been under a state of emergency to curb the violence and
insurgency acts of Boko Haram); (b) inter-communal violence over access to economic and
natural resources and political power throughout the country, but especially in Plateau State;
(c) kidnappings, armed robbery, oil theft and communal conflicts over oil spills. especially in
the South-South; and (d) ongoing efforts to reintegrate militants under an Amnesty Law in the
Niger Delta.
10. The 2015 national elections might limit the space for policy reform in the next 12 to
18 months. With the next round of elections scheduled for early 2015, the positioning of
political parties – including within parties - is in full swing. In order to build national
consensus around common goals, the Government called a national conference from midMarch to end-May 2014 to bring together Nigerians representing the various states, ethnic
groups, professional groups and trade unions, civil society organizations, religious and
traditional groups and political parties.

II.B. Recent Macroeconomic Performance and Medium-Term Outlook
11. Nigeria’s recent good macroeconomic management has provided a stable base for
growth. Nigeria’s high dependence on oil makes prudent macroeconomic management and
strong countercyclical fiscal policy essential to maintaining macroeconomic stability. To this
end, Nigeria took the critical step in 2004 of establishing a fiscal reserve fund, the Excess
Crude Account (ECA). An accumulated fiscal reserve of US$22 billion proved essential for
2

financing a stimulus package that maintained growth and stability during the global financial
crisis of 2008-2009.
12. Following the 2008-2009 global financial crises, the banking sector was effectively
recapitalized and regulation enhanced, mitigating risks. The 2013 Financial Sector Stability
Assessment1 concludes that the banking sector has been successfully stabilized and that banking
supervision has been strengthened markedly in the process. The Assessment also highlights
remaining weaknesses and risks that still need to be addressed, including the transparency of
ownership structures, the strengthening of cross-border supervisory arrangements, the phasingout of the activities of the bank’s restructuring agency (AMCOM) and the reform of
development finance.
13. The fiscal authorities pursued countercyclical policy in 2011-2013, after some
slippage in 2010, achieving significant budgetary consolidation. The estimated general
government deficit was reduced from 5.7 percent of GDP in 2010 to 1.9 percent in 2012. The
expected federal budget deficit in 2013 is 1.85 percent of GDP. The current Medium Term Fiscal
Framework prescribes continued consolidation, with the Federal Budget Deficit falling steadily
to 1.5 percent of GDP in 2016.
14. Monetary policy has also been responsive and effective. Following significant capital
inflows in recent years, the Central Bank of Nigeria has managed liquidity through changes in
the Cash Reserve Ratio and the issuance of securities. The tight monetary stance helped reduce
the pace of consumer price inflation to 8 percent in 2013 from double digits in previous years.
The CBN has also smoothed exchange rate volatility to a large extent, and has maintained a high
degree of exchange rate stability.
15. The Nigerian economy has continued to grow at a rapid pace in recent years. GDP
growth has been in the range of 6-8 percent, concentrated primarily in trade, agriculture, and
telecommunications. These three sectors alone accounted for roughly 80 percent of GDP growth
during 2009-2012 (GDP statistics are currently being re-based according to a new methodology
that should afford a reassessment of the size and growth of the Nigerian economy). The
estimated pace of annual GDP growth has slowed somewhat since 2011, falling from over
7 percent to 6.6 percent in 2012. Growth has slowed in oil and gas, agriculture and trade. The
slowdown in agriculture and trade is believed to be related to disruptions from unusually severe
flooding in 2012 and security problems in some parts of the country. Growth in agriculture
rebounded somewhat in 2013 in the context of better weather conditions and policy initiatives in
that sector. In at least some parts of Nigeria, such as Lagos State, rapid economic growth has
been transformational and can be associated with significant poverty reduction and an emerging
middle class. Inflows of foreign direct investment to Nigeria have been in the range of US$6-8
billion in recent years, making it one of the top destinations for investment in Africa.
16. Lower oil production presents an increasing macroeconomic challenge. Nigeria’s oil
output has contracted in the last three years, with negative growth in 2012 and 2013.
Regulatory constraints, other uncertainties, and security risks have limited investment in oil and
natural gas. Investors have been hesitant to make new investments in the light of uncertainty
regarding legal, regulatory, and fiscal terms in the pending Petroleum Industry Bill currently
being examined by the National Assembly. Increasing instances of disruptions to pipeline
1

Nigeria: Financial Sector Stability Assessment (2013) http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2013/cr13140.pdf.
IFM/WB, 2013.

3

operations and oil theft have also played a major role in the recent decline in oil output. Projected
slow growth in international oil trade, which is partly related to the US shale boom, may place
downward pressures on oil prices over the medium term, with implications for Nigerian oil
revenues. Due primarily to shortfalls in expected oil revenues, the balance of the Excess Crude
Account declined to US$2.5 billion in February 2014, down from US$11.5 billion at the end of
2012. Reconciliation efforts for the flow of funds from the National Oil Company (NNPC) to the
Nigeria Federation Account have also been the subject of public controversies. A forensic audit
has been requested by the authorities.
17. Countercyclical macroeconomic management is essential for stability, growth, and
diversification. Nigeria needs to counteract the volatility in oil prices and production with
strongly countercyclical macroeconomic policy. This can provide the macroeconomic stability
needed for sustaining rapid diversified growth. The accumulation of a fiscal reserve offers
protection from a negative oil price or production shock, and also enhances investor
confidence. By preventing excessive overheating and real currency appreciation in boom
times, countercyclical fiscal policy also prevents an associated erosion of competitiveness of
Nigerian firms. The effective management of a fiscal reserve is essential for the achievement
of countercyclical fiscal policy. Nigeria has passed legislation to reform fiscal reserve
management in the country, involving a shift from the current Excess Crude Account to a
Sovereign Wealth Fund based on clearer rules and regulations.
18. The overall macroeconomic outlook for Nigeria over the period of the CPS appears
strong, assuming that oil output stabilizes and oil prices remain strong. Under these
conditions, the foreign inflows that generated the balance of payments surplus and reserve
accumulation will likely continue, and will help stimulate domestic demand that has been driving
growth. The Government has pursued responsible macroeconomic policy, and assumed a prudent
fiscal stance in 2013 in light of lower oil revenues, compressing expenditures rather than
depleting the ECA further. Stronger oil production would alleviate the current tight financial
constraints on Government programs. There is strong potential for accelerated growth and job
creation if key infrastructure and institutional constraints can be successfully addressed, along
with a clarification of regulatory conditions for oil and gas. There are substantial risks to the
macroeconomic outlook, however. If growth in oil output and exports does not resume in the
near future, balance of payments and budgetary pressures could become progressively greater,
and investor sentiment toward Nigeria could deteriorate. The lack of investment in recent years
in upstream oil exploration and development will limit production in the medium term. Given the
current low level of fiscal reserves, Nigeria is also vulnerable to an oil price shock, although its
current strong debt position will offer some room for borrowing in that event. Uncertainty related
to the pace of global recovery as well as the security situation in Northern Nigeria and the
upcoming elections also feed into the macroeconomic picture. Nigeria stands at a time of great
opportunity, but also risk and uncertainty. Table 1 gives projections for an optimistic scenario
under the assumption that oil prices remain strong, oil output stabilizes, responsible
macroeconomic policy is sustained, and reforms continue.
19. Nigeria’s long term growth outlook is also affected by climate change risks. Nigeria’s
economy is dependent on climate-sensitive and climate-impactful industries, such as
agriculture, forestry, and extraction. Recent World Bank analysis 2 indicates that, if not
2

Enhancing the Climate Resilience of Growth. World Bank, 2013.

4

addressed in time, climate change is expected to exacerbate Nigeria’s vulnerability to weather
swings and limit its ability to sustain the objective of the Vision 20-20 through reduced crop
yields, declining productivity of livestock, and variability in water availability. Climaterelated challenges will be compounded by increasing population pressure on land and water
resources and rapid urbanization. However, Nigeria can adopt a range of technological
solutions and management options that can help better handle climate variability and build
resilience against a harsher climate.
Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators
2008
5.98
-6.08
8.95
11.6

2009
6.96
0.5
8.33
12.5

2010
7.98
4.56
8.49
13.7

2011
7.43
0.14
8.8
10.8

2012
6.58
-0.9
7.89
12.2

2013
(Proj)
6.5
-1.8
8.0
8.5

2014
(Proj)
7.1
1.0
8.2
7.8

2015
(Proj)
8.0
1.5
8.5
7.5

GDP Growth (%)
Oil GDP
Non-Oil GDP
Inflation Rate (CPI avg. %)
Inflation Rate (CPI Dec/Dec
%)
15.1
13.9
11.8
10.3
12
8
7.3
7.0
General Govt. Fiscal Balance*
(% of GDP)
4.7
-6.6
-5.7
-2.2
-1.9
-2.0
--2.0
-1.9
Federal Govt. Fiscal Balance
(% of GDP)
0.3
-1.3
-3.5
-2.6
-1.4
-1.3
-1.9
-1.7
Fiscal Reserves (ECA/NSWF)
(US$b)
19.7
7.1
2.7
4.6
8.6
3
6.3
11.3
Gross Monetary Reserves
(US$b)
53
42.4
32.3
32.6
46
44
44.5
44.3
in months of import cover
12.7
6.7
4.7
4.5
5.6
Nominal Exchange Rate
(N/US$), eop
132.6 149.7
150.5 158.2
157.3
Sovereign Debt (% of GDP)
11.6
15.4
15.3
17.1
18.4
19
20
21
External
2.2
2.4
2
2.3
2.5
3
3
3
Domestic
9.4
13
13.3
14.8
15.9
16
17
18
Oil production (millions of
barrels per day)
2.09
2.16
2.46
2.44
2.42
2.15
2.39
2.46
Nigeria oil price (average,
US$ per barrel)
97
61.8
79 109.4
110
109
104
98.5
Budget oil price (US$/barrel)
45.0
60.0
75.0
72.0
79.0
77.5
Source: National Bureau of Statistics, Central Bank of Nigeria, Ministry of Finance, Bank calculations.
* General government balance = the balance of federal, state, local, extra budgetary funds plus net accumulations to
the fiscal reserve (Excess Crude Account)

II.C. The Poverty Challenges
20. This CPS has been prepared in the context of the World Bank Group’s renewed
commitment to the twin goals of reducing the number of people living below US$1.25 per
capita per day to 3 percent by 2030 and promoting shared prosperity. The 3 percent target is a
global target, while shared prosperity is a country-specific target measured by income growth of
the bottom 40 percent of the population. Nigeria’s progress in reducing extreme poverty is
important for achieving the 3 percent global target because it is the most populous country in
Africa and the seventh most populous in the world.

5

21. So far, with rapid population growth, Nigeria has made slow progress in reducing
poverty. Nigeria’s official poverty line is constructed on the basis of daily adult consumption of
3,000 calories plus estimated necessary other expenditures. Using the internationally-accepted
adult equivalent methodology that accounts for less calories needed by children than adults, the
poverty headcount in Nigeria declined slightly from 48 percent to 46 percent of the population
between 2004 and 2010. The percentage of Nigerians living in extreme poverty (US$1.25 per
Box 1: Poverty and inequality trends in Nigeria: 2010-2013
The Nigeria National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) uses the Harmonized National Living Standard Survey
(HNLSS) to monitor progress in poverty reduction in the country. The survey is representative at the state level.
The most recent such survey was conducted in 2009-2010. NBS also conducts other surveys, most notably the
LSMS-ISA, a panel survey of 5000 households which is representative at national and zonal (geopolitical)
levels. Two rounds of the LSMS-ISA, conducted in 2010-2011 and in 2012-2013 have been completed, and a
third round is planned. Therefore, the most recent household survey data available from Nigeria are these panel
surveys. The poverty numbers calculated from the panel are very preliminary and are not comparable to those
obtained from the HNLSS. And as indicated above, they are not as yet adopted by the NBS as basis for
monitoring official poverty.
That said, at national level, the panel shows lower levels of poverty and a declining trend between 2010 and
2013. At zonal level, the results confirm some of the trends emerging from HNLSS analysis although absolute
numbers are also lower. The gap between North and South is widening. Poverty was already lower in the South
and further decreased in particular in the South South and South West zones. In the North, the conflict-stricken
North East experienced a substantial increase in poverty while in North Central it remains stagnant. Finally, in
the North West poverty appears to have declined but still remains at very high levels. Meanwhile, inequality
shows an increase countrywide.

capita per day purchasing power parity adjusted) declined from 64 to 63 percent. While not fully
comparable with the 2004-2010 HNLSS surveys, the emerging trend resulting from the 20102011 and 2012-2013 panel surveys is encouraging (Box 1).
22. As observed in many African countries, the low growth elasticity of poverty reduction
in Nigeria reflects growing inequality. The most widely used inequality indicator, the Gini
index, increased from 39 to 41 percent – equivalent to about 8 percent increase in inequality in 6
years. Simulations indicate that, holding inequality constant at 2004 value, growth would have
contributed to a poverty reduction of 5 percentage points, which would have implied a national
poverty rate of about 43 percent (adult equivalent).3
23. The quality of growth matters for poverty reduction. Simulations of GDP growth under
varying assumptions about the elasticity of growth to poverty reduction in Nigeria yield
interesting insights (Figure 1). At current growth rates and current elasticity (i.e. maintaining the
status quo), the number of poor in Nigeria is projected to increase (continuous line). By sharing
the growth dividend by building an infrastructure and financing platform for diversified growth
and job creation, and improving the efficiency of social services delivery to mitigate income and
opportunity inequities, Nigeria can alter the sensitivity of poverty to growth and significantly
reduce the number of poor (dashed and dot plus dashed lines) and therefore avoid maintaining
their number constant in the face of increasing population (dotted line).

3

Source: Where Has All the Growth Gone? A Poverty Update for Nigeria, WB, 2013.

6

Figure 1: Simulations on Growth and Poverty Reduction (WB 2013)
Simulations on Growth and Number of poor
150
50
100
Number of poor

4000

0

2000
0

Growth Index

6000

Nigeria : 2004 - 2050

2004

2013

2020

Growth index
Elast=20%

2030
Year

2040

Present elasticity
Elast=50%

2050
Elast=10%

24. The above is consistent with previous poverty analysis in Nigeria. The 2007 World
Bank poverty assessment report using the 2004/2005 NLSS data concluded that “the poor in
Nigeria, have less access – physical, financial and social – to government services, and formal
financial institutions. The poor have lower school enrollment rates, lower utilization of health
services, and less frequent contact with extension services for increased productivity”.
Table 2: Regional Poverty Estimates in 2003-2004 and 2009-2010: National Poverty Line Per Adult
Equivalent Consumption
Poverty Headcount
2003-04

2009-10

National

48

46

North Central

57

North East

Variation

Poverty Gap

Poverty Severity

2003-04

2009-10

2003-04

2009-10

2

18

17

9

8

48

8

25

18

14

9

59

59

0

22

23

11

12

North West

56

58

-2

21

22

10

11

South East

29

39

-9

9

13

4

6

South South

43

37

6

15

13

7

6

South West

41

30

11

16

9

8

4

of which Lagos

57

23

34

30

5

18

2

Source: Where Has All the Growth Gone? A Poverty Update for Nigeria. WB, 2013.

25. Limited inclusiveness also implies wide divergences in performance between
geopolitical regions and states. Three trends emerge concerning the geographic distribution of
the poor). In North East and West poverty rates remain very high: on average above 50 percent
and in some cases above 70 percent with a tendency to stagnation. Second, the North Central is
doing well in particular around Abuja. Finally, the picture in the South is more heterogeneous.
7

On average, this area is performing better, poverty rates are well below those in the North and
practically all standard poverty correlates indicate the generally higher level of well-being.
Furthermore, most of the important economic activities are located in the South and the level of
urbanization is higher. However, mainly the South Western part, where Lagos is located, enjoys
relatively inclusive growth which is credited with giving that region the fastest poverty reduction
rate in the country.
26. The divide between southern states and Abuja and the rest of the country appears to
reflect disparities in terms of educational outcomes, health care provision and economic
opportunities in general. As experience shows, any physical investment cannot be efficiently
utilized and maintained without a critical mass of technical and managerial skills which can only
accrue over a long period. Mapping the average share of past school attendance in labor force
age provides a good snapshot of the structural divide. In southern states and Abuja more than
60 percent of women have at least some education. The picture worsens moving towards the
North. In all states around and above Abuja, the percentage of women with some education falls
below 50 percent. At the extreme, in the North West fewer than 20 percent of local women have
any sort of education.4 For men, the situation is similar but less dramatic. In some North Central
states surrounding Abuja the percentages are similar to the South. In the North West or North
East, however, fewer than 50 percent of men have any sort of education. These results are
confirmed by health outcomes and various indexes in these areas.
27. While some progress has been registered towards the MDGs, slow poverty reduction
is reflected in Nigeria’s challenges to meet some MDGs by 2015, particularly MDGs 4 and
5. Over the last decade the trend in health, nutrition, and population (HNP) outcomes in Nigeria
has been mixed. Data from the last three Nigeria Demographic and Health Surveys (NDHSs)5
demonstrates a 36% decline during this period in the under-5 mortality rate (U5MR) and a 31%
decline in the infant mortality rate (Table 3). However the country is still not on track to achieve
MDG4. There has been almost no progress on reducing fertility. Childhood malnutrition has
actually worsened by some measures (low weight for age has increased by 21% and wasting has
increased 64%) and improved only modestly (12%) in terms of stunting (low height for age).
This mixed picture is consistent with the limited progress in delivering key health interventions.
There have been some improvements, such as in vaccination coverage and use of insecticide
treated nets (ITNs), but even these rates remain low. More worrying is the stagnation at low
levels seen in services such as family planning and the decline in other services such as skilled
birth attendance and antenatal care, which mitigate against achieving MDG5. Further, the
national level data hides a very mixed picture within the federation. For example, in the 2013
NDHS the level of stunting is 3.4 times higher in the Northwest compared to the Southeast (54.6%
vs. 16.0% respectively).

4

Where Has All the Growth Gone? A Poverty Update for Nigeria. WB, 2013.
The use of NDHS data, collected by the National Population Commission, allows for a consistent methodology
over time and facilitates cross-country comparisons. The data are also very recent.
5

8

Table 3: HNP Outcomes and Service Delivery in Nigeria 2003-2013
Indicator
Under 5 Mortality Rate per 1000 births
Infant mortality rate per 1000 births
Total Fertility Rate (Children per Woman)
Stunting, Height for Age (<-2SD) %
Low Weight for Age (<-2SD) %
Wasting, Weight for Height (<-2SD)
Skilled birth attendance (%)
Antenatal Care (%)
DPT3 vaccination coverage (%)
Contraceptive Prevalence Rate (modern methods %)
Children under 5 sleeping under an ITN (%)

2003
201
100
5.7
42
24
11
42
60
20
8
1.2

2008
157
75
5.7
41
23
14
39
58
35
10
5.5

2013
128
69
5.5
37
29
18
38
51
38
10
16.6

Source: Nigeria Demographic and Health Surveys/National Population Commission (2013 data is preliminary).

28. Significant efforts have been made to reduce gender disparities but have not yet been
reflected in the Gender Development Index (GDI) ranking (123rd out of 140 countries). The
proportion of women in the legislature increased from 4.7 in 2005 to 7 percent in 2010, and
many women occupy key government positions both at federal and state levels. Efforts are also
being made to reduce gender disparities in terms of income. At the same time, pronounced
gender disparities between regions represent a major challenge. In North East and West,
women tend to become mothers in their teens, at 17 to 19 years of age, compared to 1921 years in the Central part of the country, and above 20 years in the Coastal South.
Programs are underway to address the large disparities in pre and post natal assistance to
pregnant women between the Southern and the Northern states (see details below in section
on Government Program).
29. Regional disparities are illustrative of service delivery challenges at the sub-national
levels. States and local governments in Nigeria control more than half of the nation’s
revenue and are responsible for the provision of services that directly influence growth and
poverty and human capital development. Their autonomy, however, is largely circumscribed
by weak technical and institutional capacities, including weak Public Financial Management
(PFM) systems, as discussed below.

II.D. Key Constraints to Increasing Shared Prosperity and Accelerating
Poverty Reduction in Nigeria
30. The WBG analysis6 and the joint analysis with the CAF partners (Annex 8) reveals Nigeria
as a country whose evolution of growth and poverty has been significantly influenced by its high
dependence on oil, governance and institutional capacity, quality of infrastructure networks,

6

Nigeria Growth and Employment Study (2009), Gender in Fadama Research Project (2012); Nigeria Economic
Report (2013); Nigeria Poverty Update (2013); Financial Sector Assessment Program Update: Nigeria, 2012,
IMF/WB; Nigeria Social Protection Report (2013); Nigeria States PEMFAR Synthesis Report (2011); Nigeria
Country Report Infrastructure, Africa Infrastructure Series, (2011); Nigeria Doing Business Report (2009, 2011,
2012); Education Policy Note (2013); Towards Climate Resilient Growth in Nigeria (2013).

9

human capital (education and health), market size and wealth, the climate sensitivity of its
economy, and the labor market’s ability to provide jobs for the rapidly growing population.
31. Nigeria needs to diversify its production structure to reduce the vulnerability of its
public finance and balance of payments to a fall in oil prices and/or decline in oil output. In
recent years, oil and gas account for over 95 percent of exports, about 75 percent of consolidated
Government revenues, and over 30 percent of GDP (at current prices). Economic diversification
holds the potential to shift Nigeria away from its sole dependency on oil trade, a dependency that
threatens sustainable growth and breeds debilitating corruption. Furthermore, the increasing
exploitation and utilisation of shale gas and other alternative sources of energy by the United
States and other advanced nations is making it more urgent for Nigeria to accelerate the
diversification of its economy.
32. Nigeria needs to grow much faster to create jobs and economic opportunities to
absorb the expanding labor force. That part of GDP growth driven by the oil industry creates
few jobs and has limited linkages to local small businesses, so other sectors must play an
enhanced role in providing employment opportunities. The unemployment rate reached almost
24 percent in 2011 (up from 12 percent in 2006) and youth unemployment (15-24 year cohort) is
even more worrying at over 37 percent. Nigeria has a large cohort of youths (over 42 percent of
citizens are below 15 years of age) and, in common with many of its African neighbors, the
country’s population is growing and is projected to reach 230 million by 2030.7 Without gainful
employment for new entrants to the labor market, there will be more pressure on government
finances (higher social service spending and lower tax revenue). In contrast, if Nigeria succeeds
in the challenge of job creation, this will help reduce poverty and promote social cohesion by
allowing more citizens to provide for their own families and join the middle class.
33. Increasing infrastructure capacity is crucial as the country strives to promote private
sector involvement and exports. Poor infrastructure networks considerably raise business costs
and compromise competitiveness in key domestic industries. With approximately 3,500 MW of
total available capacity in early 2013 against an estimated demand of approximately 10,000 MW,
Nigeria has considerable unmet demand for power, with important implications for achieving
inclusive growth. Poor road conditions, lack and prohibitive costs for reliable internet
connection, along with multiple administrative barriers (local taxes, fees, and inspections)
impose huge costs and discourage investors who may consider servicing the country’s urban
markets. 8 Strong growth and job creation in a number of Nigerian cities should increase
migration from rural to urban areas, thereby naturally increasing the productivity of those who
remain in agriculture. Increasing productivity in agriculture can have major implications for
poverty reduction. Yet, without good connectivity to larger markets, farmers rely primarily on
small family farms and local services, with limited opportunities for growth through downstream
linkages to agribusiness. Poor people continue to be trapped in a downward spiral of low
agricultural productivity, environmental degradation and limited access to basic services
necessary for health and well-being.
34. The financial sector is yet to play a stronger role in supporting inclusive growth. Lack
of access to finance, particularly longer-term finance, impedes private sector growth and job

7
8

World Population Prospects: the 2012 Revision, http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/unpp/p2k0data.asp.
Nigeria Country Report Infrastructure, Africa Infrastructure Series, World Bank, 2011.

10

creation potential.9 After power, access to finance is the biggest constraint faced by firms. There
is limited intermediation to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) by the formal financial
sector. Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) are not meeting their development objectives and
need to be reformed in order to address specific market failures. Lending by financial institutions is
heavily concentrated on larger corporations and their supplier value-chains.10
35. Infrastructure and financing constraints contribute to low productivity. Low
productivity activities do not pay enough to lift people out of poverty. While the majority of poor
households are engaged in some income-generating activity, that income is not enough to lift the
household from poverty. The majority of jobs held by Nigerians entail working on family farms
or in very small household enterprises. Only about 10 percent of working-age Nigerians earns a
wage or salary. With 50 percent of the population depending on agriculture for income, raising
the productivity of small-holder farms is, therefore, a key aspect to reducing poverty11. At the
same time, enabling small and medium-size firms to grow and hire more labor will make growth
more inclusive.
36. Low education and health outcomes weaken the platform for growth and poverty
reduction. While good outcomes in nutrition, health, and education are development goals in
themselves, they are also essential for developing the skills and abilities needed to increase
growth and reduce poverty in the medium to longer run. Nigeria needs to increase access to and
improve quality of human development services (skills, education, health, water, nutrition). The
country ranked 154 out of 187 countries in the 2012 United Nations Human Development Index.
Forty percent of children are undernourished – either because of disease or a lack for adequate
caring practices and foods. The large number of illiterate adults (close to 22 million) and the
large share of school-aged children out of school (26 percent of boys and 31 percent of girls)12 is
evidence of the need to make the country’s low-skilled and unskilled labor force more
employable.13 Basic “nutrition-specific” investments (such as vitamin and mineral supplements for
young children and pregnant women) and practices such as exclusive breast-feeding (through
health extension services, changes in labor laws, women’s workload reduction, etc.) can address
the nutrition-specific issues and enhance human capability (productivity) and ultimately,
employability.
37. Poor governance has limited the poverty reduction and potential of safety net
schemes to mitigate shocks. Social protection programs in Nigeria are small, fragmented and
focused on a narrow set of risks and target groups. Institutions implementing social protection
programs have overlapping and unclear mandates, unclear flow of funds, and make use of
undefined targeting mechanisms. 14 Overall, the present state of social protection programs
cannot ensure that all members of society reap the benefits of growth, and—with few
exceptions—doesn’t seem to buffer the economic and climatic shocks faced by the poor.
Recognizing the challenges, in recent years, the government has sought to develop social
protection instruments as a mechanism to tackle such high rates of poverty and vulnerability in

9

Financial Sector Assessment Program Update: Nigeria, 2012, IMF/WB.
Idem.
11
The National Job Creation Survey, NBS. 2013.
12
Nigeria Education Data Survey.
13
Nigeria is among only ten countries worldwide with more than 10 million adult illiterates (15 years and above).
14
Nigeria Social Protection Status Report, WB, 2013.
10

11

the country and to support progress in both the economic and the social spheres. As such, social
protection has now become a major policy priority for the Government.
38. Nigeria needs more effective institutions and good governance at federal and state
levels of government to achieve sustainable and inclusive growth and mitigate violence that
persists in some of its regions. Good governance is critical for improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of public expenditures, and also helps to build social cohesion and confidence in
institutions. It is also essential for enabling private sector to play its role as the main engine of
growth and job creation.15 The experience of Nigeria shows commendable actions taken by the
Government but significant challenges remain – both at the federal and state levels. The Federal
Government has taken a number of steps to improve land ownership registration, fight
intellectual property (IP) piracy and counterfeiting of goods, and improve the effective
promotion of IP rights. The tightening of financial system regulation and supervision by the
Central Bank of Nigeria in 2009 helped to improve the soundness of the financial system. The
2011 Freedom of Information Act liberalized access to government documents, significantly
enhancing the transparency. In the oil sector, the reduction of subsidies and the adoption of
procedures to verify subsidy payments is a major achievement. On the outstanding challenges,
dispersed policy reforms and poor implementation at federal and state levels impede the
transparency of the regulatory framework for investment.16 Vested interests, complex patronage
networks and traditional loyalties and affiliations have resulted in a diversion of funds away from
intended targets and undermined the trust between citizens and the state. The poor quality of data
and statistics and weak monitoring and evaluation systems undermine the quality of policy
design and dialogue across all sectors and different levels of Government (Annex 5).
39. Many governance and service delivery challenges are at the sub-national levels.
Nigeria’s federal system provides states a significant degree of legal and de facto autonomy in
public sector management, and with large responsibilities in delivering services.17 However, state
autonomy is largely circumscribed by weak technical and institutional capacities and modest
commitment to implementing reforms. For example, there has been limited progress on
improving public financial management in order to translate revenue into efficient and equitable
service delivery.18 It bears noting that states perform differently in delivering services: similar
per capita expenditures in health and education lead to different outcomes, and public sector
management efficiency is likely to play an important role. 19 A new generation of state governors
is emerging, some of whom are engaging in public sector reform as a way to improve the quality
of services provided. The early results from such efforts are creating new competition for
reform-minded leadership in Nigeria.

15

World Development Report on Jobs, World Bank, 2013; Africa at work: Job creation and inclusive growth”,
McKinsey, 2012.
16
OECD Investment Policy Review of Nigeria: Strengthening the Policy Framework for Investment of the Federal
Republic and Lagos State, Draft, December 2013.
17
Most of the powers assigned to state governments are concurrently shared with the federal and local government.
However, states have residual powers (any subject not assigned to federal and local government level by the
Constitution), and have large responsibilities in delivering services in agriculture, health, education, social
protection, transport, and water and sanitation.
18
Nigeria State Level Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review: A Synthesis Report,
WB, 2011; Nigeria State Level Public Expenditure Management; A Summary Report World Bank 2013.
19
Nigeria Socio Economic Assessment, World Bank, 2013.

12

40. The competitive spirit of reform-minded leadership offers scope for demonstration
effects to help spur growth, strengthen institutions, and reduce existing or possible arenas for
violence within the country. Nigeria, like other developing countries, is examining global
development experience and best practices with a view to adapt and embed those into its
strategies, policies, and projects. In addition, many states within Nigeria are looking at the
experience of Lagos state and seeking to emulate its progress. Once cited as an example of a
failed megacity, Lagos has made strong progress in improving infrastructure and services and
reducing poverty, and many states in Nigeria seek to learn from its experience. Clearly,
demonstration effect holds great potential to impel federal and state authorities in Nigeria toward
similar policies and projects in order to emulate international or domestic success.

II.E. Opportunities for Growth, Increasing
Accelerating Poverty Reduction in Nigeria

Shared

Prosperity

and

41. With large reserves of human and natural resources, a large domestic market, a
decade of strong economic growth, evolving democracy, and macroeconomic stability,
Nigeria has major opportunities to accelerate development and reduce poverty. The
growing demand for services and manufacturing associated with the emerging middle class
and rapid urbanization 20 present huge growth opportunities for SMEs and the agricultural
sector, benefiting from the large size of the domestic market. Globally there is a strong
causal link between urbanization and economic development.21 Power sector reform is the
backbone for future growth which, together with efforts to increase financial services and
address the transportation infrastructure deficit, will effectively connect poor households as
producers in productive markets. Millions of small farmers will have the potential to produce
more and become part of competitive agriculture value chains, although only few are
currently linked to markets that would provide them with the stable income necessary for
long-term productive investment.
42. ICT holds a strong potential for contributing to economic growth, jobs, productivity,
transparency, accountability, and social inclusion. New technologies have the potential to
raise opportunities for the middle class, and create greater domestic inclusion, with appropriate
policies. ICT can itself reduce the cost of some of public services. E-delivery can improve
transparency and governance as it reduces discretion and corruption. The mobile telephone is an
example of a technology product whose falling costs made it accessible to all income classes.
Mobile telephony has been one of India’s success stories, demonstrating the potential of ICT for
inclusion. The Nigerian economy has already embraced e-commerce with two e-platforms fully
functional and with the potential of leapfrogging e-trade in Nigeria in the next decade. This
sector is already attracting a number of young Nigerians from the diaspora.
43. There is scope for increased growth and diversification through regional and global
integration. Consolidation of the Economic Community for West African States (ECOWAS)
market (300 million people) will create spillover effects that will benefit all partners. ECOWAS
offers significant growth potential for Nigeria’s agriculture sector and gas-based industries,
and also holds tremendous opportunities for Nigeria’s financial sector. The potential for cross‐
20

About half the total population now lives in cities compared to 35 percent in 1990, and this share is projected to
increase to about 65 percent by 2025.
21
World Development Report, 2009.

13

border portfolio investments by ECOWAS institutions and individuals is high, although full
integration is still a long way off. Nigeria still has weak links with the rest of the region.22 The
recent decision at the October 2013 ECOWAS Summit to consolidate the common market and
adopt the ECOWAS Common External Tariff, along with measures to simplify customs
procedures at the border, will offer Nigeria additional opportunities to develop regionally and
globally competitive sectors and to diversify exports through a vibrant and globally
competitive private sector.
44. The Convergence and Stability Pact 23 concluded among the ECOWAS Member
States may help maximize the potential for economic growth in Nigeria with important
ripple effects for neighboring countries. The Convergence Pact is a formal commitment by the
ECOWAS Member States to (a) coordinate economic policy, (b) strengthen macroeconomic
management and macroeconomic stability, and (c) consolidate monetary cooperation in the
region. Efforts are underway to integrate the region’s three leading stock exchanges—the
Nigerian Stock Exchange, the Bourse régionale de valeurs mobilières in Abidjan, and the Ghana
Stock Exchange—and develop mechanisms for cross-listing and trading.

III. GOVERNMENT PROGRAM AND MEDIUM-TERM STRATEGY
45. Nigeria aims to become one of the 20 largest economies in the world by 2020. Its
development agenda, laid out in the Vision 20:2020 document focuses on two transformational
objectives: (a) optimizing the country’s human and natural resource potential to achieve rapid
economic growth; and (b) translating that growth into equitable social development for all
citizens. In this context, the outcome of the ongoing GDP rebasing exercise will offer a
reassessment of the size and structure of the Nigerian economy, and should offer a new
framework for informing economic policies that promote competitiveness and the future
development of the country.
46. The Government’s medium-term strategy for achieving these goals is articulated in
the 2011 Transformation Agenda (TA), which aims at laying the foundation for a robust and
inclusive growth of the Nigerian economy. The Transformation Agenda places strong emphasis
on measures to address the constraints identified in the previous section, with special emphasis
on creating sufficient jobs to address the protracted problems of unemployment, poverty and
inequality, and improving and sustaining the well-being of all Nigerians regardless of their
personal circumstances and location.24 The mid-term review of the TA presents actions already
taken by the Government to: address the country’s huge infrastructure constraints; broaden the
nation’s productive base and promote private sector investment with particular emphasis on nonoil sectors with strong job creation and multiplier potential; and improve social outcomes and
strengthening social safety nets.25 Underpinning the TA is a fiscal reform program that seeks to
build fiscal buffers and safeguard macroeconomic stability, reduce the deficit of the federal
Government and the level of domestic debt, and increase capital spending, particularly for
infrastructure where the needs are huge.

22

Economic Outlook; Sub-Saharan Africa. International Monetary Fund. 2012.
Adopted in 2012.
24
Mid-Term Report of The Transformation Agenda (May 2011–May 2013):Taking Stock, Moving Forward, NPC, 2013.
25
Idem.
23

14

47. The mid-term progress report of the TA emphasizes improvement of governance, as
exemplified by a number of steps taken. The new National Sovereign Wealth Fund (NSWF),
which was established in 2011 and is now fully operational, will likely be less vulnerable than
the ECA to political demands for ad hoc withdrawals.26 The Government succeeded in reducing
fuel subsidy payments by both reducing the subsidy rate and cracking down on corruption – the
petrol subsidy program had been blighted by vested interests and massive corruption. In the
agricultural sector, there has been progress in cutting some corruption out of the fertilizer
subsidy scheme. The Subsidy Reinvestment and Empowerment Program (SURE-P) was
introduced to cushion the partial deregulation of the downstream petroleum sector and mitigate
the immediate impact of the petroleum subsidy discontinuation, especially on the poor and
vulnerable, and accelerate economic transformation through investments in critical infrastructure
and social safety net projects. Efforts are being made to streamline the activities of the
Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs) with a view to reducing the financial burden and
enable government operate more efficiently and effectively. The Treasury Single Accounting and
the Governments Integrated Financial Management and Information System (GIFMIS) were
introduced in 2012, representing an important step forward in increasing the efficiency of PFM.
The transition of federal and state governments to International Public Sector Accounting
Standards (IPSAS) has improved the consistency of government financial reporting with
international standards. A chip-based secure national identity card has been launched and the
deployment of the NIMS infrastructure commenced in early 2012. The scheme is expected to
deliver a single database system for the management of identity in Nigeria and prevent the use of
false, multiple, duplicate, or ghost identities. The biometric payroll system (the Integrated
Personnel and Payroll Information System, IPPIS), piloted in 2007 in 7 MDAs, is being
progressively rolled out across a large number of MDAs (with plans for full roll-out in 2014).
The deployment of IPPIS is estimated to have saved the federal government millions of Naira
due to elimination of ghost workers from the federal payroll.
48. Continuing efforts are made to increase the internally generated revenues from the
non-oil sector. Tax administration reforms introduced since 2004/5 are progressively helping to
streamline and clarify tax procedures, affording taxpayers easy payment options. Tax procedures,
processes and forms for registration and payment, as well as the tax laws, are now available
online on the Federal Inland Revenue Service (FIRS) website. The most notable achievement
under tax administration in 2013 was the piloting of an Integrated Tax Administration System
(ITAS) solution to automate and electronically tie all core tax administration modules together
for higher efficiency. The Government is currently working with McKinsey to identify pockets
of productivity improvement in tax administration. Great strides have also been made in the last
few years in introducing automation and modern information technology into the operation of
the Nigeria Customs Service (NCS). The NCS has been progressively modernized and given the
additional role of trade facilitation through the reforms. Results to date include taking over the
Destination Inspection operations from the previous Pre-Shipment Inspection service providers,
and setting the system for independent monitoring of NCS revenue collection and operational
performance, for example. The ongoing reforms in the NCS will help improve the transparency
26

NSWF has three vehicles. One, a stabilization fund, will take on the mandate of the ECA and be used to shield the
country against external shocks. An infrastructure fund will make direct investments to improve transport and power
networks, while a third, the Future Generations Fund, will invest in a broader portfolio of international assets, with
the aim of preserving and growing the country’s cash reserves.

15

of fees paid for services rendered, will enhance regional and continental trade, and are also
expected to help boost security in the country.
49. Progress is being made in expanding financial markets and increasing credit access to
non-oil sectors with strong job creation and multiplier potential. One of key strategic
orientations of the Government is to secure economic diversification and promote job creation by
improving financial markets and increasing credit access to productive sectors of the economy.
In the housing sector, for example, the Government has partnered with the private sector to
increase the supply of longer-term financing to enable better access to mortgages. This will create a
more liquid property market in lower income segments of the population and encourage private
investment in housing and construction. In addition, the Central Bank has developed a financial
inclusion strategy that aims to increase access to finance for SMEs and the largely underserved
rural areas. The strategy includes extending agent banking and mobile banking, as well as reform
of the development finance framework for Nigeria.
50. The Government is making strong efforts to promote SME development and
creation. The national policy on micro, small and medium enterprises has been revised and has
led to the recent launch of the National Enterprise Development Program for MSME
development (NEDEP), which restructures the institutional framework for SME support.
Furthermore, several programs have been launched to support entrepreneurship and enterprise
creation in Nigeria. For example, the Youth Enterprise with Innovation in Nigeria (YouWiN) is
an annual business plan competition supporting promising entrepreneurial young individuals to
develop and execute business ideas that will lead to jobs creation. The program attracted 50,000
aspiring entrepreneurs in the first year, and over 100,000 in the second year. The program has
trained 6,000 entrepreneurs so far, provided grants to about 50 percent of the entrepreneurs
trained, and is set to contribute to 80,000 jobs over its period.
51. In view of achieving diversification and stronger job creation, focus is especially
placed on agriculture and manufacturing as major drivers of growth and exports. The
agriculture sector reform aims to increase productivity, but also trade and investment
linkages and expanding value addition to locally-produced agricultural products. Successful
reform in this sector is expected to create over 3.5 million jobs by 2015. 27 Within the
manufacturing sector, the TA targets petrochemicals, chemicals, food, textiles, metals, and
non-metal minerals, and adopts a cluster-based approach (geographic distribution of these
key priorities across six main regions of the country). Increasing the downstream linkages of
agriculture and manufacturing with wholesale and retail trade would potentially allow the
country to generate more jobs locally and to retain more value added. These efforts have
been crystallized in the Nigeria Industrial Revolution Plan (NIRP) recently launched by the
President as well. The results of the agricultural sector reform are already visible, as
exemplified by some corruption cut out of the fertilizer subsidy system and by increased food
production. Progress in the manufacturing sector has been constrained by multiple
challenges, including poor power supply, high cost of inputs and of doing business, multiple
taxation, infrastructural deficit, low access to finance (particularly long-term finance) and
weak and poor information flow. The stronger implementation of the power sector reform
will have a significantly positive effect on manufacturing in Nigeria. Increasing FDI inflows

27

Mid Term Report of the Transformation Agenda (May 2011-May 2013): Taking Stock, Moving Forward, NPC, 2013.

16

in manufacturing and services, 24.3 percent and 12.2 percent in 2011 respectively, are
encouraging signs for non-oil investment and future growth.
52. Reducing infrastructure bottlenecks is one of the key elements of the Government’s
agenda. The National Integrated Infrastructure Master Plan (NIIMP) is being developed to
promote a coordinated approach to infrastructure development in the country. This is a 30-year
plan to be implemented using 10-year operational plans and 5-year medium-term plans. It is
estimated that Nigeria needs approximately US$350 billion over the period 2011-2020 to close
the infrastructure gap.28 The limited fiscal space in the public budget, however, constrains the
Government’s ability to rely solely on public funding for productivity-enhancing investments.29
Tackling Nigeria’s infrastructure bottlenecks thus requires both public funds and effective
leveraging of private sector resources. Accordingly, there has been increasing momentum
towards developing infrastructure projects through public-private partnerships (PPPs), including
for developing the vitally important gas-to-power infrastructure. Gas-to-power infrastructure is
vital for meeting the domestic demand for power as well as for developing regional exports. In
the transport sector, the Government’s endeavors to rehabilitate roads across the country have led
to improved conditions of key road corridors (including about 600 km of roads under Banksupported projects) and to launching road safety initiatives to tackle the high rate of road traffic
crashes and fatalities in Nigeria. The Government is also using the Subsidy Reinvestment
Program (SURE-P) to accelerate the rehabilitation of key road links totaling more than 1,600km,
such as Abuja-Abaji-Lokoja, Benin-Ore-Sagamu, Onitsha-Enugu-Port Harcourt, KadunaMaiduguri, and East-West Road. As for air transport infrastructure, over 20 airports have been
earmarked for rehabilitation and reconstruction, and funding has been approved for the
construction of five new airport terminals. To fully reap the benefits from investment in air
transport infrastructure, authorities need to continue strengthening the capacity of air transport
regulatory bodies and infrastructure providers. Addressing Nigeria’s transport connectivity
problems can also benefit from well-performing railways. After many years of decay, attempts
are being made to revive the existing Lagos-Kano railway corridor. In parallel, authorities are
investing in the rehabilitation of railway lines and are seeking to open new railway corridors with
a view of concessioning those to potential investors. Transport infrastructure challenges are
huge. The authorities need to focus more on strengthening the governance of the sector through
better strategic planning and enhanced managerial, institutional, and technical capabilities in
various transport modal institutions and entities. An integrated multi-modal approach, including
multi-model spatial planning, is needed to prioritize projects, to optimize allocation of resources,
and to take advantage of growth corridors and increasing urbanization over the medium term.
53. Significant headway has been made in the power sector which has the highest
potential to propel the economy to the desired level of growth and development. Nigeria’s
power sector reform program is one of the most comprehensive and complex ever undertaken
in Africa. The program: (a) establishes an independent regulator for the sector, the Nigerian
Electricity Regulatory Commission; (b) sets up a commercial framework for the sector, with
cost-reflective electricity tariffs; (c) establishes a bulk trader; (d) privatizes the Power Holding
Company of Nigeria’s (PHCN) six successor generation companies; (e) privatizes the eleven
PHCN successor distribution companies; and (f) continues efforts to strengthen the gas-to28

An Infrastructure Action Plan for Nigeria: Closing the Infrastructure Gap and Accelerating Economic
Transformation, African Development Bank, April 2013.
29
Financing Options for Infrastructure PPPs in Nigeria. WB, 2012.

17

power segment. Significant progress has been achieved in all these areas, which has already
led to tangible improvements in available supply, increased grid stability, increased revenue
collection, and the introduction of a cost-reflective, multi-year tariff. On 30 September 2013
the share certificates of 15 state-run electricity distribution and generation companies were
handed over to a consortium of domestic and foreign investors, marking a major milestone in
the power sector’s privatization process. The reform program also improved governance
mechanisms and oversight by clarifying roles and responsibilities of key sector institutions to
improve the transparency, accountability, corporate governance, and general oversight of the
sector. As distribution underpins the fundamental soundness of the sector, the success of the
reform will be largely determined by the capacity of the private operators to transform the
newly-privatized distribution companies, which will in turn help attract additional investment
in generation and transmission.
54. Alongside the economic objectives, the Transformation Agenda pursues social
objectives. Recognizing the need for addressing social challenges, the Government has decided
to redirect savings from the reduced oil subsidy through to investing in the SURE-P, expanding
its interventions in health, education and social safety nets. The total subsidy savings for the
Federal, state and local governments is N816 billion ($5 billion) from February 2012 (inception
of SURE-P) to December 2013. More than 50% of the Federal portion was deployed to social
sector/safety net interventions (Public works, CCT-MCH, Vocational Training, Graduate
Internship Scheme, etc.). Nigeria budgeted N273.52 billion (US$1.7 billion) for SURE-P in
2013, and another N268 billion ($1.67 billion) is planned in 2014 (including a balance of 88.4
billion naira carried over from the previous year). Social safety nets are being set up along with a
minimum wage and other initiatives to improve access to housing and financing through microcredit. In the education sector, the TA aims to improve access and quality, infrastructure, funding
and planning, as embodied in a new four-year strategy adopted by the Federal Ministry of
Education (FMOE) 30 with the overarching objectives of providing access to education with
equity, quality, and relevant skills for the labor market. In the health sector, there have been
achievements in strengthening the institutions needed for progress. At the federal level,
important steps include the development of a National Strategic Health Development Plan,
creation of a coordination template for accountability and tracking of resources in response to the
International Health Partnership (IHP+), the establishment of a central coordination mechanism
for data management in the health sector, the rehabilitation of the Nigeria Health Insurance
Scheme (NHIS), and increased investment in data and surveys (including the MDGs survey of
2012). In parallel, an accountability framework for improving immunization coverage on polio
was developed with the involvement of the Governors, reinforced by the Polio Task Force which
was inaugurated by the President of the Republic. To bolster the attention paid to primary health
care at state level, a large number of states have established, or are in the process of establishing,
state primary health care development agencies. These agencies have responsibility for
strengthening the delivery of basic services particularly in rural areas where publicly provided
services predominate. The Saving One Million Lives (SOML) initiative is taking a results-based
approach to: (a) strengthening basic health services – particularly in rural areas, with the goal of
preventing deaths of mothers and children; (b) improving clinical governance across all care
levels; (c) strengthening primary and secondary prevention care; and (d) creating an enabling
environment for private sector involvement in health services and commodities. A number of
30

Federal Ministry of Education: 4-year Strategic Plan for the Development of the Education Sector (2011-2015).

18

new initiatives were launched, such as support for the Midwives Service Scheme, Village Health
Workers Program, roll out of the Community-based Social Health Insurance Scheme, the
Community Health Extension workers, and support for immunization and lifesaving
commodities for women and children. Over 9,000 health care workers were recruited to provide
quality ante-natal, skilled birth delivery and post-natal services for underserved, poor women in
rural areas.
55. Efforts are being made to enhance the climate resilience of the country’s development
agenda. Aware of the country’s high vulnerability to climate change, the Government is in the
process of finalizing a National Climate Change Policy and Response Strategy (NPCC-RS).31 In
parallel, the National Adaptation Strategy and Plan of Action for Climate Change in Nigeria
(NASPA-CNN) are also being finalized. These will provide a guide for the integration of climate
change adaptation goals into government policies, strategies and programs. Concerning
agriculture in particular, the NPCC-RS calls for the “development of an integrated agricultural
intervention plan to reduce the sector’s vulnerability to climate change and enhance its
productivity for food security and poverty reduction.” A high-level advisory committee on
agriculture resilience in Nigeria (ACARN) has been established to provide scientific support to
this effort. Finally, the Government has been working with other African countries to establish
African Risk Capacity (ARC), a groundbreaking extreme weather insurance mechanism
designed to help African Union member states resist and recover from the ravages of drought.
ARC is an African solution to one of the continent’s most pressing challenges, transferring the
burden of climate risk away from governments – and the farmers and pastoralists whom they
protect – to the ARC that can handle that risk much better.
56. The water sector recently witnessed a resurgence of activities. The rapid and uneven
expansion of many Nigeria’s cities is putting pressure on water and sanitation services, leading
to increased efforts to improve the quality and coverage of those services.32 A Water Summit,
organized under the leadership of the President of Nigeria, focused on ways to identify
innovative financing options in the sector where the needs are significant. In addition, the dam
projects which were hitherto abandoned have now been reactivated and are now at various stages
of rehabilitation for supply of bulk water to treatment plants, generation of hydro-electricity,
provision of water for irrigation farming and fisheries to boost food security. Furthermore,
efforts are underway to modernize the institutional framework of the water utilities to give them
more autonomy and allow them to improve access, reliability, financial viability, and sector
governance more broadly.
57. Increased women’s representation in government, gender budgeting requirements in
selected ministries, and gender-sensitive programs should aid in the fight for more access
and inclusion. Women’s representation in government has increased with the appointment of 13
female Ministers out of 42, increasing the cabinet posts for women from 16 percent in the 2004
administration to 33 under the current government. 33 The ministries of Agriculture,
Communications, Health, Water Resources and Works are allocating budget resources to support
programs for women, and have to that end signed Memoranda of Understanding with the Federal
31

Approved by the Federal Executive Council in September 2012.
The priority was reaffirmed during February 2013 Water Summit, which re-established the consensus among the
federal and state governments and partners on the need to act promptly and jointly to improve water service delivery
in Nigeria.
33
Mid-Term Report of the Transformation Agenda. 2013.
32

19

Ministry of Finance and the Federal Ministry of Women Affairs. This initiative, tagged Growing
Girls and Women in Nigeria (G-WIN), was piloted under the 2013 federal budget in these five
Ministries/sectors and is continuing in 2014 with plans to mainstream across all sectors in the
future. The Maternal and Child Health Care program (implemented as part of the SURE-P) and
the second round of the Youth Enterprise with Innovation in Nigeria program are targeting
women in health, education and entrepreneurship and business opportunities.
58. The Government has made notable progress in advancing ICT agenda in Nigeria. It
developed the ICT Policy and the National Broadband Development Plan for 2013-2018, and is
currently preparing the e-Government Strategy. The Federal eGovernment Services Portal was
launched to drive efficiency and service delivery by institutionalizing a Government-wide
messaging system and establishing Federal Government ICT Cadres and Council of ICT Heads.
Efforts are also being made to nurture ICT incubation and accelerator centers (iDEA and
Techlaunchpad), in addition to launching initiatives such as “Federal Open Data”, “NaijaCloud
microworks” and “Girls in ICT”, all with the aim of IT industry development and job creation.

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
IV.A. Lessons from CPS Completion Report, IEG Evaluation and
Stakeholder Consultations
59. The key lessons from the CPS FY2010-2013 Completion Report (Annex 7) that underpin
the design of the new CPS include the need to: (a) better understand the political economy of
various levels of government, and ensure that all activities are assessed from a governance
perspective, with a focus on strengthening institutions and policy frameworks rather than funding
inputs; (b) deepen the Bank’s engagement at the state level in recognition of the strong role played by
states in economic and social development of the country; and (c) balance federal and state reform
efforts to enhance and ensure the sustainability of development outcomes.
Highlights of CPS Completion Report
Overall progress toward achieving the CPS outcomes is rated moderately satisfactory.
Results for Pillar 1 Achieving Sustainable and Inclusive Non Growth were partially achieved:
Activities supported transformational reforms, particularly in the agriculture and energy sectors
where technical support and policy dialogue helped generate broad consensus on and momentum
for the reform agenda. Planned improvement in business environment was less successful mainly
due to the late start of the main instrument, the Growth and Employment in Markets, and a
shortcoming in the design which covered the entire country whereas Bank’s interventions
focused on selected states.
Results for Pillar 2 Sustainable Human Development were partially achieved. Significant
progress was achieved in improving health sector development, community development and
post-basic education outcomes. This period also helped to lay the foundation for results-based
activities, implemented under this new CPS period.
Results for Pillar 3 Governance for Results were fully achieved. The governance pillar, a core
aspect of the program, also demonstrated remarkable achievement towards expected outcomes,
considering the strengthening of Public Financial Management (PFM) systems, improved
integrity in payroll and personnel control mechanisms in the civil service. Notwithstanding,
scaling up governance reforms remains a priority for this CPS.
20

60. The new CPS also incorporates key lessons from IEG validation of previous CPSs.
These include the need to: (a) ensure that economic and sector work is accompanied by sustained
dissemination and dialogue with Government; (b) forge better links with state ministries and
local Governments, and (c) continuously monitor macroeconomic developments and maintain
the dialogue with the federal and state Governments on fiscal discipline.
61. The Nigeria Country Survey 2013 and the CPS consultations with Government, civil
society, think tanks, and the private sector suggest that the Bank’s processes, procedures, and
instruments will have to be more adaptable, context-specific and responsive to clients’ needs. By
broadening strategic collaboration with key partners and stakeholders in the country, the WBG
can help generate broader consensus for reform.

IV.B. Overview of World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy
62. The overarching objective of the CPS FY2014-FY2017 is to support the
Transformation Agenda’s goals of laying the foundation for socially and regionally
inclusive economic growth. Based on the country diagnosis, strong level of demand by federal
and state authorities, and the comparative advantage of the WBG, the CPS organizes the Bank’s
interventions around three strategic clusters with concerted efforts to strike the right balance
between actions to strengthen the enabling environment and direct interventions:
a) The federally-led structural reform agendas for growth and jobs. The agendas seek
to foster diversified growth and job creation by addressing the two key constraints
(power and access to finance) and target agriculture as a means for improving living
conditions in rural areas. WBG support focuses on: (a) increasing installed power
generation and transmission capacity and improving the efficiency and governance of
electricity delivery; (b) increasing supply of long-term financing for the housing
sector, expanding financing opportunities for SMEs, and strengthening the ability of
state-owned Development Finance Institutions to mobilize private finance for key
sectors of the economy; and (c) boosting agricultural productivity, improving
farmers’ linkages with agro-processors, and scaling up Nigeria’s resilience to current
and future climate variability.
b) The quality and efficiency of social service delivery at state level for greater social
inclusion. WBG support will focus on developing more effective mechanisms for
social service delivery (social protection programs, education, health, and water
services delivery) to help address inequities in income and opportunities.
c) Governance and public sector management. The WBG program aims at strengthening
accountability and public expenditure and investment management. Considerable
savings could be realized from public sector efficiency gains and reallocated towards
the objective of inclusive growth. The CPS integrates gender, equity and conflict
sensitivity as essential elements of governance.

21

63. The WBG has strong comparative advantages in each of these strategic areas. The
Bank has been the main interlocutor for the Government on power development for the past 1015 years and this is an area where the WBG products and expertise play a critical role in
leveraging private investment in the power sector. The WBG broad financial expertise and global
knowledge will also help to leverage local, regional and international financial markets for
financing for development. Building on its successful long engagement with the government on
community-driven approaches to increasing income and productivity of farmers, the WBG will
continue to bring to bear its global experience and knowledge on agricultural productivity,
agriculture value chain development, and climate adaptation and mitigation measures. In social
services, the Bank will continue to be a main interlocutor with the authorities on social safety
nets, water sector reform, and a results-based approach to delivery of education and health
services. As a foundational principle, all of these efforts will be underpinned by the Bank’s
strong engagement on governance and public finance management at state and federal levels.
This is also an area where IDA is increasingly leveraging support from other partners.
64. These three strategic clusters are already embedded in the existing portfolio and will
be reinforced through new lending and non-lending support. The current IDA portfolio (endFebruary 2014) consists of 23 active IDA projects (US$4,920 million), 2 regional IDA
operations (US$180 million), 4 GEF projects (US$26.2 million), and 68 active trust funds
(US$198.2 million). The current IFC and MIGA exposure is $1.13bn and $14.5m, respectively.
The WB’s portfolio is well-aligned with the Government’s strategy. It includes eight lending
operations in infrastructure (electricity, rural roads, urban transport, water, and PPP), eight in
social sectors (education, health, social protection, including youth public workfare programs),
one in natural resource management (mitigating land degradation), five in sources of growth
(agriculture, housing finance, ICT, and light manufacturing), and three in public sector (PFM and
public sector management).

22

Box 2: The CPS approach to Northern Nigeria
The key elements of the CPS approach to Northern Nigeria include:
 Recognition of the critical importance of understanding of cultural and institutional specificities of the
region and its political economy, including the drivers of conflict and fragility. The Bank’s governance
work (Annex 6) will provide critical tools and inputs to understanding the drivers of conflict.
 Emphasis on engagement at the state and community levels, with some exploratory capacity building
activities in education and PFM at the local government level in a limited number of states.
 Emphasis on collaboration with CAF partners in supporting the efforts of federal and state authorities in
Northern Nigeria to: (a) increase routine immunization in the North, where rates of immunization are
particularly low; and (b) increase access to primary and secondary education, recognizing the
comparative advantage of DFID and USAID in this area. Within the context of the CAF, the Bank will
continue to deepen its collaboration and dialogue with partners and federal and state authorities on
support to Northern Nigeria.
 Emphasis on broadening the Bank’s strategic collaboration with stakeholders from the North of Nigeria.
The Bank has initiated dialogue with the group of Northern governors (Northern Governors TA) to
respond to their request for advisory support to develop a strategic framework for accelerated socioeconomic development in the North, and is working on a special initiative for the North East states under
state of emergency.
 Flexibility in adjusting the CPS program to the evolving security situation, and within the overall
framework of support of the CAF partners to Northern Nigeria. The CPS will maintain a cautious but
scalable approach that takes advantage of any expanding window of opportunity, drawing, as appropriate,
on a range of specialized instruments that could provide the level of scalability and flexibility necessary
in what is likely to continue to be a rapidly-changing situation.
The lending support to states in the North aims to: (a) increase infrastructure stock (roads and irrigation) in areas
with high agriculture potential and improve their connectivity with markets; (b) improve the employability of
labor force by increasing the capacity of training institutions to meet the demand for technical skills, and by
increasing access to and quality of primary education; (c) improve social protection programs and livelihood
opportunities for poor households; (d) increase access to and quality of health services; (e) strengthen the
capacity for reform of water utilities; (f) strengthen the capacity for enhanced climate change resilience; and (g)
improve PFM. In each of these areas, the CPS will seek to increase transparency and promote social
accountability – both of which are considered important for reducing arenas for violence. The EU-funded
SLOGOR operation will support public financial management reforms in the states of Kano, Jigawa and Yobe
while an IDA operation will support similar reforms in Adamawa, Kebbi and four other Northern states.

65. The diagnostic work planned in FY2014-2015 will provide the strategic platform for
further selective support, and for engaging with the Government. The CPS will develop a
strong knowledge platform to underpin the dialogue on poverty, jobs, inclusive finance and
markets, education/skills, safety nets, and urbanization issues. Importantly, this knowledge work
will help initiate WBG’s strategic engagement on urbanization and socio-economic development
in the North (Box 2), where it will also help guide the design and implementation of the CPS
program by providing a more thorough understanding of how specific operations may contribute
to reducing conflict arenas and to enhancing inclusiveness. The CPS mid-term review will offer
an opportunity to reassess the program and fully define the FY16-17 lending program in
consultation with the new Government.
66. The emphasis on demonstrational and catalytic interventions is reflected in the CPS
results matrix (Annex 1). The majority of results are expected to be generated by demonstration
operations whose impact will maximized over time, beyond this CPS period, through knowledge
sharing and scaling up. To that end, a state-level platform will be developed to facilitate
knowledge exchange among states in the areas of capacity building, project implementation,
impact evaluation, and beneficiary feedback to strengthen policy and project design and
23

execution. The platform will help in strengthening the capacity of states from all geopolitical
zones in the country, and is expected to help promote the emulation of successful experiences
and practices.
The CPS Principles of Engagement:
 Selectivity is driven by (1) the country diagnostic work, level of demand from federal and state authorities,
and WBG comparative advantage, (2) emphasis on maximizing the CPS impact in the context where WBG
financial resources are small compared to the country’s own resources, and (3) potential for impact through
support of reform-minded leadership.
 Tailoring to Context: Understanding the political, cultural and social context within which interventions
take place so that best practices can be appropriately adapted to their environment. A Governance, Gender
and Conflict filter will be rolled out to ensure new products have sufficiently understood the local context,
opportunities and risks. Guide the design and implementation of the program thorough understanding of the
concrete factors that may drive violence and how specific operation may contribute to reducing conflict
arenas and to enhancing inclusiveness.
 State level lending support will be guided by (a) satisfactory portfolio performance (overall disbursement
delay not greater than 6 months and satisfactory fiduciary and safeguards performance), (b) demand for
support and commitment to reforms, including participating in financing, (c) state interest to participate in
the planned governance benchmarking pilot, and (d) the availability of information on public expenditure
and budget execution.
 Leverage for results: Leverage government programs, and promote results-based lending, which will
provide greater opportunity to influence the way the state governments spend their own resources and to
strengthen their capacity to achieve and sustain results. Leverage private resources and promote private
investment, giving priority to transformative projects and programs. Facilitate knowledge exchange among
states through a state-level platform, helping to build/strengthen the capacity of states from all geopolitical
zones in the country. The Bank will also continue to pursue an open engagement with Nigerian civil society
and think tanks on critical questions for the country’s development through its sector work, including the
regular release of the Nigeria Economic report, workshops and forums.

67. The CPS consolidates and deepens the WBG’s engagement at state level. Under the
federal system of government, states and local governments control a large share of public
expenditures and have direct responsibility for delivering many social and other services to
poverty reduction and promoting diversified growth. The federal government has always been
keen to ensure that the WBG's portfolio is distributed across the 6 geographical regions of the
country more or less equitably, in order to maintain some unity. This is a strong factor in
Nigeria's political economy and will continue to influence the distribution of the WBG program.
Within this setting, the WBG’s lending support will be guided by each state’s: (a) satisfactory
portfolio performance (overall disbursement delay not greater than 6 months and satisfactory
fiduciary and safeguards performance); (b) demand for support and commitment to reforms; (c)
willingness to participate in the planned governance benchmarking pilot; and (d) the availability
of information on public expenditure and budget execution.

IV.C. Engagement Areas Supported by Lending and Non-Lending Activities
First Strategic Cluster: Federally Led Structural Reforms for Growth and Jobs
68. Given the evidence that diversified growth and job creation have an important
impact on poverty reduction, the CPS will support private sector-led diversified growth
and job creation. The bulk of the financing program will focus on: (a) increasing installed
power generation and transmission capacity and improving the efficiency and governance of
24

electricity delivery; (b) boosting agricultural productivity, improving farmers’ linkages with
agro-processors, and scaling up Nigeria’s resilience to current and future climate variability; and
(c) increasing access to finance, including long-term financing, for key sectors such as housing,
SMEs, agriculture, and infrastructure, through various mechanisms involving both private sector
and PPPs, and potentially through a state-owned wholesale financing mechanism. The WBG’s
approach under this strategic cluster is to maximize the impact of the CPS by: (a) strengthening
linkages among mutually reinforcing agendas (e.g. rural roads, agriculture, irrigation); (b)
promoting synergy among programs and projects implemented by different levels of
government, including through spatial analysis; and (c) maximizing the synergies between the
WB, IFC and MIGA, particularly as regards leveraging additional resources and providing a
basis for stronger private sector investment. MIGA’s products, which include both its traditional
political risk insurance coverage against transfer and convertibility restrictions, expropriation,
breach of contract and war and civil disturbance as well as the Agency's new non-honoring of
financial obligations cover aimed at enhancing credit and increasing access to commercial
financing, can help leverage cross-border investment, in particular for critical infrastructure, such
as power, water and transportation. During the CPS period, MIGA will actively seek to deepen
its engagement in Nigeria through additional business development efforts in the infrastructure,
manufacturing and agribusiness sectors, in addition to its already strong engagement in the
energy sector. MIGA will also engage with Nigerian outward investors in support of their
projects in Africa and elsewhere.
69.

The three areas of focus under the First Strategic Cluster are discussed in details below:

POWER GENERATION AND TRANSMISSION CAPACITY, AND EFFICIENCY OF POWER SUPPLY
TO CONSUMERS
CPS outcome
Outcome indicators
Increase power generation and transmission  16 percent increase in generation capacity
capacity
 8% increase in transmission capacity.
Improve the efficiency of electricity delivery
 8% reduction in the aggregate technical and
commercial losses of privatized DISCOs
supported by the WBG EBP.
Improve access to modern lighting for the base  1 million solar lanterns distributed
of the pyramid through supporting the value  5 million people with improved energy
chain of procuring and distributing solar
services
products such as lanterns and cook-stoves
 100,000 tCO2 being GHG avoided.
70. Establishing an effective power supply in Nigeria will enable households to make social
and productive investments that will improve their livelihoods, and enable firms to increase
productivity and be more competitive. The Government has embarked on an ambitious energy
sector reform process that is resulting in tangible improvements in energy services. The reform
program also improved governance mechanisms and oversight by clarifying roles and
responsibilities of key sector institutions to improve the transparency, accountability, corporate
governance, and general oversight of the sector. While a strong institutional structure is now in
place, many of these institutions are new, and until viability of new arrangements is proven, the
risk perception of private investors will remain high.

25

71. The WBG will assist the Government in increasing installed power generation and
transmission capacity, and improving the efficiency and governance of electricity delivery.
The Bank is providing ongoing support through the IDA Nigeria Electricity and Gas
Improvement Project (NEGIP), focusing on core transmission and distribution investments and
capacity building needed to deliver the increased power supply expected from the 10 NIPP
power plants. NEGIP is also providing partial risk guarantees for gas producers entering into
long term supply agreements with state owned or recently privatized power plants to improve the
credit worthiness of these transactions, thus providing the comfort necessary for much needed
upstream gas infrastructure investment. The Joint World Bank Group "Energy Business Plan"
(EBP) (Box 3) will support the privatization process, delivery of an initial group of Independent
Power Producer (IPP) projects, strengthening the transmission backbone, as well as preparation
of a future portfolio of renewable energy, access and domestic gas supply projects. The newlycreated public trading company (Nigeria Bulk Electricity Trader, NBET) will increase the
quality and transparency of transactions and ensure compliance with best practice procedures
including internationally accepted IFC performance standards. The mobilized private investment
will increase installed power generation capacity and improve the efficiency of electricity
delivery, helping to spur economic growth and increase shared prosperity. Specific focus will be
put on the Northern states facing dire power deficit in the absence of proximate power generation
sources (the bulk of power is generated in the Nigeria’s gas-rich south), and insufficient
transmission capacity to deliver the limited quantities they receive. MIGA has a number of
projects in its pipeline in the power and gas sectors which are in line with the objectives of the
NEGIP project and the joint EBP. By leveraging private sector financing, WBG support will
ensure transparency and a fair deal for consumers while reducing the need for additional public
spending on power generation and distribution, enabling more public funds to be deployed to
address other infrastructure and social needs identified in Vision 20:2020.
Box 3: The Joint Bank Group Energy Business Plan for Nigeria (EBP)
The power sector reform in Nigeria encompasses the entire power sector value chain – from upstream
gas development, through generation and transmission, to distribution and end-user tariffs. It is more
comprehensive and ambitious than any power sector reform undertaken so far in Africa.
The Energy Business plan aims to accelerate implementation of the Power Sector Reform Roadmap by
leveraging WBG products and expertise to attract private investment in new generation capacity. Joint
solutions by IBRD/IDA, IFC and MIGA for the first set of IPPs/GENCOs/DISCOs under the reforms
are expected to have a measurable impact on the sector. The fast-tracking of key projects to financial
closure will enable the power sector to attract some of the most experienced and capable private sector
investors while removing duplicative due diligence steps across WBG, making it easier to do business
and deliver results. The targeted transactions may benefit from a mix of different types of IBRD partial
risk guarantee support (credit enhancement, debt mobilization, regulatory) as well as the joint WBG
support (IFC equity and lending participation and MIGA guarantees) where justified, and where there is
no duplication of WBG coverage.
While IBRD has taken a lead role on the overall sector dialogue, due diligence with regard to the power
sector reform program, and the power sector’s financial situation and prospects, IFC is playing a
leading role on lender coordination and investor due diligence. MIGA's value added is expected to be
credit enhancement through termination guarantees, regulatory risk and other investment guarantees
paired with vast knowledge and experience in developing political risk insurance instruments for power
and gas sectors in other countries with similar types of reform.

26

72. An increased supply is expected to provide a sustainable base for future access
expansion to the 65 percent of Nigeria's population that lack access to electricity services.
IDA and IBRD investments through NEGIP and the Nigeria Electricity Transmission and Access
Project are expected to add significant transmission capacity to the national grid over the
medium term, allowing the increased power generated from new NIPP and IPP projects due to
come online between 2014-2017 to reach consumers in Nigeria's urban growth centers as well as
in the under-supplied North. Increased supply is expected to improve the commercial viability
and quality of service of distribution companies, leading to considerable cost savings for
connected households and SMEs and reducing their dependency on self-generation. Increased
supply will also provide a sustainable base for future expansion to the 65 percent of Nigeria's
population that lack access to electricity services. Due to the weak financial, technical and
operational position of Nigeria's distribution companies, large-scale access expansion to rural
areas is not expected to be achieved within the CPS period. However, the expected improvement
of utility service levels and commercial viability represent critical milestones to expanding
access in the medium to long term.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE (RESILIENCE)
CPS outcome
Outcome indicators
Improved access of small  Increased effectiveness of publicly supported seed and
farmers
to
inputs
and
fertilizer distribution systems as measured by the increased
technology, and increase in
number of farmers benefiting from those programs
their average income
(Baseline: 30% in 2012; Target: 60% in 2017)
 Additional 20,000 hectares of improved irrigation in North
and North-West areas
 40% increase in average income of rural households in
Fadama areas
Improved horizontal
 Number of farmer associations and or marketing
coordination of small farmers
cooperatives established in supported areas increased from
0 to 7,400
Improved road transportation
 Additional 2,000 km or rural roads rehabilitated in
connectivity of rural markets
supported states
 Additional 2 million people in rural areas gained access to
an all-season road in supported states.
Enhanced preparedness of  2,800 additional ha of land treated for erosion
Nigeria to respond to natural  60% of upgraded or new HydroMet stations provide data
hazards, climate risks and
that are published annually and uploaded to the web.
natural disasters
73. One percent increase in agricultural productivity will decrease a person’s likelihood
of being poor by between 2 to 3 percent. 34 The agriculture sector employs half of the
workforce, providing livelihood for about 90 percent of the rural population. The agricultural
sector was leading contributor to GDP in 2011, accounting for 31 percent. Within agriculture, a
major driver of growth is staple food crops (35.8 percent of the agricultural GDP in 2011).35 As
34
35

Agriculture and Rural Poverty in Nigeria, World Bank 2013 (forthcoming).
Nigeria: First Agriculture Development Policy Operation, World Bank, 2013.

27

the majority of small farmers in Nigeria grow staples, broad based productivity gains in staples
will have a far reaching impact on the rural poor, including women, who account for 60-79
percent of the rural labor force.36 Yet, access to the necessary productivity enhancing inputs is
limited, due to the inadequate investment in agricultural research and development, limited
private investment in developing improved seeds and fertilizers, the insufficient availability of
improved technologies to farmers, use of various ICT enhanced tools, as well as lack of
knowledge about their use. Value chains remain underdeveloped due to poor infrastructure, a
lack of finance for agriculture, and a dearth of market information. Significant deficiencies in
large-scale dam and irrigation infrastructure negatively impact agricultural productivity, notably
in the North where the bulk of Nigeria’s dam and irrigation infrastructure is located. Lack of
access to markets, including through various ICT enabled mechanisms, is a key determinant of
rural poverty and low agricultural productivity. In 2007, it was estimated that less than half of the
rural population lived within 2 km of an all-weather road,37 and less than 10-15 percent of the
country’s state and rural roads are in good or fair condition. 38 Deteriorated infrastructure
increases transport costs for farmers and agro-business, which in turn lowers their productivity. It
also affects human capital, as poor households can neither send their children to local schools nor
access social services provided in health or community centers.
74. Agricultural productivity is sensitive to climate and land degradation. Climate change
is likely to exacerbate Nigeria’s current vulnerability to weather variability, leading to a longerterm reduction in crop yields of up to 20-30 percent; declining productivity of livestock with
adverse consequences on livelihoods, and worsening prospects for food security, particularly in
the north and south-west, among others.39 Land degradation accounts for between 1.7 and 6.4
percent of GDP,40 and is accelerating in the South-East and the arid and semi-arid North.
75. The WBG will support the agriculture and climate change (resilience) reform agenda
and its implementation through the federated structure. The ongoing Programmatic
Agriculture DPO, Fadama 3, Commercial Agriculture Development Project (CADP), Nigeria
Erosion Management and Watershed Management Project (NEMWAP), Rural Access and
Mobility Projects 1 and 2 (RAMP 1 and 2), and the planned Irrigation Project, Staple Crop
Processing Zone Project (SCPZ), and Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change Operation
(DRM-CC) are all instruments that focus on strengthening agricultural productivity and
enhancing climate resilience, with benefits accruing to the rural population and other
communities exposed to weather and climate shocks. Key measures include: (a) improving
farmer’s access to fertilizers, seeds, and extension services; (b) improving farmers’ linkages in
selected staple value chains in order to help reduce their transaction costs of accessing inputs or
distributing outputs, thus enhancing their competitiveness; (c) improving farmers’ access to rural
infrastructure (roads and irrigation, with increasing focus on the North where the bulk of
Nigeria’s largest dams and irrigated cropped area are located); (d) reducing immediate and longterm climate risks to rural livelihoods by treating and reversing land degradation, supporting
climate smart agriculture, water catchment management, reducing deforestation and forest
degradation and fostering reforestation, and enhancing capacity to prevent and manage climate36

Gender in Nigeria, DFID 2012.
Rural Accessibility Index of 47 percent.
38
Nigeria’s total road network consists of 194,000km of roads (34,000km federal roads; 30,000km state roads,
130,000km) registered rural roads. Rural Access and Mobility Project 2; World Bank, 2012.
39
Towards Climate Resilient Growth in Nigeria, WB. 2013.
40
Nigeria Erosion and Watershed Management Project, World Bank, 2011.
37

28

related disasters including through more efficient hydro-meteorological systems and innovative
finance to respond to shocks. Building on the quantitative and qualitative analysis of gender and
agriculture in Nigeria, projects supported by the Bank in this area increasingly target women as
beneficiaries, in addition to tracking the share of women in the total direct beneficiaries.
Recognizing the increasing vulnerability of Nigeria’s urban settlements to floods which tend to
hit the urban poor and vulnerable particularly hard, the CPS support may include support to
improving resilience of urban centers to natural disasters.
76. The impact of the above operations will vary in terms of its geographical scope. The
Programmatic Agriculture DPO is expected to achieve the country-wide impact, given its focus
on the policy framework. Commercial Agriculture Development Project, Nigeria Erosion
Watershed Management Project, Staple Crop Processing Zones project, Rural Access and
Mobility Project 1 and 2, in contrast, have a demonstrational and catalytic nature and are not
expected to generate country-wide impact but to offer models and practices that could be scaled
up. For example, the efforts to treat land for erosion include strong community involvement in
order to help secure their participation and ownership of the larger erosion management planning
and implementation of activities that will ultimately bring a more permanent solution. It also
bears noting that the 2,800 additional ha of land treated for erosion that will be achieved during
this CPS is only a fraction of the total 12,000 ha that will be treated for erosion beyond the CPS
period. The Disaster Risk Management – Climate Change operation would focus on flood prone
areas such as those along Benue river basin. The other example of demonstrational support is the
IFC and the WB work on a joint business plan to help strengthen linkages between farmers and
agro-processors through the demonstration SCPZ project. Consistent with the emphasis on
synergy and complementarity between projects, the CPS pairs this work with support under the
Growth and Employment in Markets (GEM) project to improving linkages among agroprocessors, logistic providers, certification services, and farmers, which will help reduce the
vulnerability of rural households to volatility in market demand. MIGA will continue to seek
opportunities to support private investments in the agribusiness sector, including smaller
projects. MIGA currently has three projects in the pipeline.
77. A common theme to the support package is the strengthening of institutional and
governance arrangements across all levels of Government. The CPS will augment the use of
stakeholder analysis for project design and policy dialogue and continue to embed strengthening
institutional set-up, regulatory framework, financial management, capacity building and social
accountability in projects. In addition, RAMP 1 and 2 projects will help strengthen sub-national
capacity to implement sound rural transport policies and to manage rural roads in a financially
sustainable manner. RAMP 2 will also promote social accountability by linking road funding to
the performance of state and local Governments and by introducing community-based and
performance-based approaches to rural transport infrastructure management and maintenance.
78. Through the Country Assistance Framework, the WB will coordinate its activities
with other partners, mobilize and implement trust fund support as appropriate, and
promote opportunities for leveraging additional resources. Strong collaboration is already
established with DFID, IFAD, AfDB, USAID and UNIDO on support to staple crop processing
zones. Trust fund support continues to play an important role by funding technical assistance,
such as for implementing recommendations of the Post Disaster Risk Assessment and
strengthening the capacity of Nigeria’s post disaster risk management institutions (EU/GFDRR
funded projects), and engaging with the Government on agricultural commodity exchange in
29

Nigeria (Trade Facilitation in Nigeria Agricultural Markets). IDA resources under RAMP 2 are
leveraged in several states with resources from the French Development Agency, with a view to
scaling up to include more states and attract more donors.
FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT
CPS outcome
Outcome indicators
Expanded financing
 Additional 100,000 loans provided to SMEs by IFC
opportunities
for  Additional 2 million micro entrepreneurs provided with financial
SMEs
services by IFC.
Improved supply of  Percentage of long term financing >24 months of outstanding private
longer
term
sector credit increased to 5% of the total private sector credit
financing
 Percentage of housing finance loans in the financial sector increased to
5% of the total loans
 Volume of corporate bond issues increased on average to 2 issues every year.
79. Nigeria needs to broaden and deepen its financial services to diversify its production
structure and promote a structural shift in employment demand. Lending by financial
institutions is heavily concentrated on larger corporations and their supplier value-chains.41 Oil
and gas is the main lending sector, representing approximately 22 percent42 of total credit to the
private sector. The domestic local currency savings (primarily from pension funds) are not
channeled to the productive sectors such as infrastructure, housing/mortgages, and SMEs. 43
Long-term financing, particularly for infrastructure and housing, is largely absent.44 SMEs in
Nigeria have enormous potential to play a crucial role in economic growth, poverty
reduction, employment and wealth creation. However, many find it difficult to survive and
grow, as they lack access to the finance, skills and information to expand and grow. 45
Nigeria’s SMEs account for only about 5 percent of total lending by commercial banks.46
80. The CPS program includes support to expanding access to financial services for
SMEs and enhancing their capacity to absorb those services. The package of support
envisions IFC working with local banks to expand access to financing for SMEs, while in
parallel building the banks’ capacity to innovate, manage risk, and efficiently monitor SME
lending. IFC also plans to provide support for establishing and/or improving financial
infrastructure (e.g. collateral registry, credit bureaus, payments/mobile banking) to lower the
risks associated with SME lending by banks and other SME financiers. It also plans, directly and
through wholesale solutions, to finance commercial microfinance institutions to better reach the
base-of-the-pyramid entrepreneurs (especially women).
81. Consistent with expansion of financial services, capacity building support will be
provided to SMEs and agricultural enterprises to make full use of those services. IFC plans
to scale up its capacity building support to SMEs through a country-wide roll-out of its Business
41

Financial Sector Assessment Program Update: Nigeria, 2012, IMF/WB.
Idem.
43
As of June 30, 2013, the estimated aggregate pension funds-under-management were US$22 billion from only 5.6
million registered pension contributors, of which over 80% is invested in the federal Government’s Treasury bonds.
44
Financing Options for Infrastructure PPs in Nigeria, WB, 2013; Housing Finance Project, PAD, WB, 2013.
45
Radwan I, Pellegrini J: Knowledge, Productivity, and Innovation in Nigeria: Creating a New Economy, World
Bank, 2010.
46
Financing Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises in Nigeria, April 2012.
42

30

Edge and SME toolkit access programs. 47 Recognizing that a significant portion of Africa’s
MSMEs are owned and run by women, IFC will seek to address obstacles that women face in
business and will target sectors for investment that tend to employ women. IDA will continue its
support to promising industry clusters that have the potential for employment growth – the ICT,
entertainment, construction and manufacturing sectors – through the Growth and Employment
(GEM) project. CAF partners DFID, GIZ, and EU will closely complement this focus through
their work on addressing regulatory and administrative barriers to specific cluster/value chains.
The support in this area is evolving and the CPS progress report will offer an opportunity to
capture and reflect its impact in the results matrix, as appropriate.
82. The WBG program will also focus on increasing the supply of long-term financing,
which is expected to help boost productive employment. The planned Development Finance
operation will help reform the development finance framework and build a leveraging
framework to securely channel long term savings from pension and other funds into long term
lending for the SMEs, agriculture and infrastructure. By supporting the establishment of the
Nigeria Mortgage Refinance Company (NMRC), the Housing Finance Project supported by IDA
and IFC will help to increase the supply of long-term finance to the housing market, and enhance
access to finance for lower income borrowers. Unlocking the residential housing market through
the development of the housing finance market can provide a wide range of income
opportunities through the construction sector and related industries, as evidenced in Colombia
and India. The WBG work in the housing sector is complemented by efforts by DFID and
Gesellschaft fuer Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) to improve land and legal systems, and
the quality of housing construction.48
83. Given the scarcity of bank lending for diversified growth, IFC plans to promote the
development of non-bank financing. Its support will focus on: (a) local currency bond; (b)
regulatory approvals for an IFC medium-term notes shelf program, to enable IFC to periodically
issue bonds to fund projects in Nigeria with longer-term financing; and (c) the Efficient
Securities Markets and Institutional Development program, supporting regulatory capacity
building at the Securities & Exchange Commission and National Pension Commission, among
others, to help rejuvenate the non-sovereign bond market. Diversifying financial intermediation
to the debt capital markets complements the strengthening of the banking sector.
84. Knowledge work represents an important element of the support package. The
proposed sector work – Inclusive Markets, Inclusive Finance and an Investment Climate
Assessment Report on Drivers of Job Creation – will aim to enhance the overall effectiveness of
the program. In conjunction with the planned Job Assessment Report, this work will provide
policy-makers and new Government with an evidence-based platform to adjust policy mix in
order to optimize the overall impact of finance for development reforms on jobs and income.
This knowledge work will also help shape eventual additional lending support in FY16-17.

47

These are upgraded toolkits designed to assist small and medium entrepreneurs in optimizing their businesses.
The building blocks of the housing sector are sound macroeconomic policies, access to long term financing,
improved land and legal systems and increased housing construction.

48

31

Second Strategic Cluster: Quality, Effectiveness and Efficiency of Social
Service Delivery at State Level for Greater Social Inclusion
85. The CPS support seeks to address inequities in income and opportunities by
developing more effective mechanisms for social service delivery (social protection
programs, education, health, and water services delivery). Social services delivery in Nigeria
is largely poorly targeted, with limited coverage, and is not evaluated periodically. This results in
sub-optimal utilization of funds, and constrains the ability of all members of society, and
especially the poor and vulnerable, to reap the benefits of growth or to buffer the economic and
climatic shocks faced by the poor.
STRENGTHENING COMMUNITY DRIVEN MECHANISMS
EFFECTIVENESS OF SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMS

FOR

SOCIAL INCLUSION,

AND

CPS outcomes
Outcome indicators
Improved targeting of  # of states using the unified registry of beneficiaries and common
social protection and
targeting mechanism increased from 0 to 10
increased employment
 Additional 100,000 youth who received orientation and life skills
readiness of youth in
training
supported states.
 40 percent increase in the number of poor beneficiaries (lowest
quintiles) from targeted poor households receiving cash transfers.
Increased access of
 Increased number of poor and vulnerable people (of which not less
poor and vulnerable
than 50% are women) with access to social and livelihood support
households to social
services through community development plans.
and economic services
86. For a country to respond effectively to shocks and protect its vulnerable citizens, it
needs a coherent social safety net system. Over the last ten years or so, the WB has been
supporting community driven development approaches in many Nigerian states as a major
mechanism for increasing access and utilization of human development and social services by
poor and vulnerable. The projects have generated good results to date, suggesting the continuing
validity of this approach. However, given the marginal poverty reduction in Nigeria, there is
clearly a need for much stronger efforts to accelerate its pace and strengthen the targeting
system. In particular, social safety nets need to play much stronger role in mitigating inequality
of income and opportunity.
87. WBG support combines the continuing support to the CDD approach to poverty
reduction and efforts to strengthen the social safety net system. The ongoing Community
Social Development Project (CSDP), State Expenditure Effectiveness for Results (SEEFOR), the
Youth Employment and Social Support Operation (YESSO) and the planned Additional
Financing for the CSDP and Social Inclusion and Welfare Advancement project are all
instruments that will focus on strengthening community driven mechanisms for social inclusion
and effectiveness of social protection programs. These interventions will complement the recent
initiative by the federal Government to develop a comprehensive national social safety net
framework for the country. A multisectoral federal task team has been established to fashion a
robust social safety net coordination program in consultation with state governments and
development partners and complimentary to existing interventions. Key elements of the ongoing
and planned support in the area of social protection include: (a) empowering the poor and
32

vulnerable in the effort to fight poverty; (b) strengthening the capacity for coordination,
monitoring, policy development and the creation of co-financing mechanisms for social safety
net programs at the federal level and establishing a common targeting system and the Unified
Register of Beneficiaries at the state level; (c) supporting the existing public workfare program
and training unskilled youth for job opportunities, while ensuring that women are included and
do benefit from those programs; (d) conditional cash transfer program to encourage poor families
to invest in education and health of their children and female young adults; and (e) increasing the
share of participating local governments that are funding and incorporating community
development plans in their budget. Results achieved to date regarding the number of youth
trained, common targeting mechanism, unified registry of beneficiaries, and cash transfers to
poor beneficiaries reflect progress in improving the efficiency of government programs. States
are expected to scale up mechanisms and practices which have been developed to deliver those
results. The WBG will reinforce and support social protection programs in the immediate future
through the planned Social Inclusion and Welfare Advancement Project. The Bank will also
continue to coordinate its activities and collaborate with United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), United Nations Development Program (UNDP), International Labor Organization
(ILO), DFID, UNICEF and UN Women within the CAF framework to ensure complementary
and effectiveness of efforts.
88. The planned diagnostic work will play an important role in advancing the WB’s
dialogue and national debate on social protection in Nigeria. Sharing Prosperity in Nigeria:
An Analytical Work Program on Jobs and Social Protection; the Social Protection Status
Report 49 and the Nigeria-specific follow up to the World Development Report on jobs will
provide a strong knowledge platform to stimulate national debate and engage with the new
Government on those issues. This work will be complemented and supported by the work funded
under the Governance Partnership Trust Fund, Rapid Social Response Trust Fund and the trust
fund on environmentally and socially sustainable development.
COVERAGE AND QUALITY OF HEALTH SERVICES
CPS outcomes
Outcome indicators
Improved coverage  The share of child deliveries that are assisted by trained health
and
quality
of
personnel in 3 states increases to 43 % by 2017 (baseline: 33% in
health
service
2013; delivered by the results-based financing of health services in 3
delivery
states)
 The share of children 12-23 months old who are fully immunized in 3
states increases to 45.4% by 2017 (baseline: 25.4% in 2013; delivered
by the results-based financing of health services in 3 states)
 % of under-5 children sleeping under insecticide treated net the night
preceding the survey increased from 44.6 % in 2010 to 60%
 At least 80 % coverage with oral polio vaccine sustained in every state
by 2017.
 % of pregnant women living with HIV who receive a complete course
of antiretroviral prophylaxis to reduce the risk of mother to child
transmission increased from 18% to 40%.
49

Undertaken in coordination with DFID, UNICEF and AfDB.

33

89. Economic growth has not improved health status. Rates of malnutrition among children
has either stagnated or worsened depending on the indicator used and the total fertility rate
remained stagnant over the last decade. The bright spot has been a reduction in under-five
mortality rates and this is likely due to the distribution of long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets
that prevent malaria (malaria accounts for almost 24% of the entire burden of disease in Nigeria).
The upper income quintiles in Nigeria have access to a large private health sector that is mostly
beyond the reach of the poor who have to rely on a public sector that is not performing well
enough to meet their needs. Governance, rather than an absolute lack of resources, appears to
be the main problem in the public health service delivery. Failure to address key governance
issues such as accountability, incentives, availability of credible data, and capable
management has consistently impeded progress in improving service delivery even when
inputs have been available
90. The CPS program will support the Government in implementing bold approaches to
addressing governance issues and strengthening service delivery. The ongoing Nigeria State
Health Investment Project and the proposed Program for Results (P4R) operation will promote
results-based financing to address governance issues. The focus is on changing incentives and
increasing accountability for service delivery by linking disbursements (and payments to health
facilities) to increased quantity and quality of health services. Health facilities in remote areas
receive higher payments to address equity issues. The Nigeria State Health Investment Project
has successfully piloted results-based financing and will now expand this to cover 3 states.
Building on the lessons learned, the proposed P4R operation will use a variety of results-based
approaches in an additional 6-12 states. Effective use of ICT systems will be explored for
improved service delivery by encouraging data-driven decision-making, targeted beneficiary
feedback, and tracking progress against DLIs.
91. Efforts will be made to help improve monitoring and evaluation, with trust funds
providing important support in that respect. The HRITF Impact Evaluation Trust Fund is
supporting the Nigeria State Health Investment Project to assess its progress, thus providing an
evidence base for its scaling up. Through the Quality of Service grant, the Bank is piloting
service delivery indicator surveys in 12 states. Data collection systems will also be strengthened
through the proposed P4R operation, including by leveraging various ICT tools.
92. The package of support also comprises IDA and IFC collaboration to pilot improved
hospital management through PPPs and the continuing implementation of the on-going
HIV/AIDs, malaria, and polio projects. The Polio Buy-Down Program (trust fund) has
continued to provide critically important support to eradicating polio in Nigeria. Additional
financing operation may be required in order to help the government eradicate polio and shift
effectively to strengthened routine immunization (RI), especially in conflict-affected areas of the
country where polio is still circulating. The country needs to maintain the polio-free status for
three years after interrupting transmission to be declared polio-free. Since the most polio
endemic states, Borno and Yobe, face serious security challenges, the new support will test
innovative approaches to improve the very low routine immunization coverage and strengthen
primary health care more broadly.

34

EFFICIENCY, EQUITABLE ACCESS AND QUALITY OF EDUCATION SERVICES
CPS outcomes
Outcome indicators
Improved learning environment
 10,000 additional teachers in rural areas (baseline:
and management capacity for
31,243 in 2013, delivered by the results-based
education
financing of education services in 3 states)
 50% of supported schools demonstrate improvements
in learning outcomes (baseline: 4000 schools in 2013,
delivered by the results-based financing of education
services in 3 states).
Strengthened responsiveness of
 # of states with approved Strategic Plan for improving
public and private training
quality and relevance of TVE increased from 4 to 15.
institutions to skills demand
93. Education is key for Nigeria’s economic growth and poverty reduction. Despite the
progress made, many challenges remain to increasing enrollment in primary education. About
one in every three primary-school-age children still does not have access to primary education.
Poverty has been consistently found to be the dominant factor that prevents many children from
starting school on time or even setting foot in school.50 Most of these children are concentrated
in the North, in rural areas, and in poor households. Girls from such backgrounds are
substantially more disadvantaged in education than are boys. On average, only 37 percent of
students finish primary school at the official age of 11. At the national level, 60 and 44 percent of
students, after completing grade 4 and grade 6 respectively, cannot read a complete sentence.
About 10 percent cannot add numbers at the end of primary education. Lack of technical and
vocational training and low productivity affect product quality and the growth of value chains in
Nigeria. Many graduates are unable to find jobs, while skills remain in short supply in some
industries. A recently-completed Policy Note on Access, Quality and Equity in Education
Nigeria established that student achievement is hindered by the lack of qualified teachers,
insufficient teaching, learning resources, school autonomy and weak accountability for results.
Underlying Nigeria’s skills gaps are a weak basic education system and a lack of coordination
between firms and education and training institutions.
94. Given that the WB’s contribution to the education and training sector in Nigeria is a
very small percentage of overall financing of education (less than 3 percent), the Bank’s
support will be primarily catalytic, aiming at transforming behaviors and practices. The
recently-approved State Education Project pilots the results-based approach in three states to
increase the number of qualified teachers in rural areas (rural schools usually lack qualified
teachers), ensure a regular system of state-level standardized assessments, and improve quality
and relevance of technical and vocational education. The planned Global Partnership for
Education project will promote a similar approach in 9 states in the North, in close coordination
with DFID, USAID and UNICEF, all of which have existing interventions in the area. The
planned additional financing for the Lagos Eko Project will consolidate good progress in

50

Nigeria Education and Skills Policy Notes; Policy Note 1: Education Access, Equity and Quality in Nigeria, 2013.

35

improving the quality and relevance of vocational training, 51 while the Africa’s Centers of
Excellence Project will aim to strengthen Nigeria’s capacity to respond to the demand for skills
through West Africa and the continent.
95. Knowledge work will play an extremely important role in advancing the WB’s
dialogue with the Government and other stakeholders, and the national debate on
education and skill challenges. The planned series of Policy Notes on Skills for Growth and
Competitiveness, Political Economy of Education Reforms, Public Expenditures in Education
and Training First (PET), Poverty, and Jobs will aim to (a) improve the national awareness of the
significance of the education problem in Nigeria and the critical importance of education for the
national development, and (b) provide a platform for a much stronger strategic engagement with
federal and state authorities on how to bring about a profound institutional reform in the
education sector.
COVERAGE AND EFFICIENCY OF WATER SUPPLY SERVICES
CPS outcomes
Improved coverage and
efficiency of water supply
service in selected states

Outcome indicators
 # of people with access to improved water supply increased by
4 million
 45 percent average increase in cost recovery for operation and
maintenance.

96. Nigeria has invested heavily in the water supply and sanitation sector, but significant
challenges remain. Over the last 20 years, access to safe drinking water increased by 13
percentage points from 48 percent of the population in 1990 to 61 percent in 2010.52 During
the same period, the share of those with access to improved sanitation actually declined by
about 15 percent, from 37 to 31 percent. The sector has been weakened by poor operation
and maintenance, inept institutions, poor tracking of budgeted funds and expenditures,
insufficient technical capacity, lack of coordination across different levels of Government,
and lack of inter-sectoral coordination. Lack of financial autonomy is at the heart of the poor
performance of all water utilities, coupled with frequent changes in management.
97. WB support will help improve coverage and efficiency of water supply service.
Building on the ongoing Urban Water 1 and 2 projects, the new investment support (Water 3)
will also address governance aspects such as institutional strengthening, policy and regulatory
reform, tracking system for access to potable water, service standards for State Water Boards,
and the involvement of civil society in sector dialogue to increase transparency and
accountability. WB activities will be anchored at the federal and state levels in order to promote
synergies between state level reforms and federal awards of investment support. In a number of
states, the WB’s expertise in the sector is leveraged with resources form the AfDB and AFD.
MIGA can also play a role in facilitating private investments in infrastructure, both at the federal
as well as state levels, and is currently actively looking at two projects in the water sector.

51

Formal partnerships established in the Lagos States under the Lagos Eko Project between the five public technical
colleges and private companies resulted in nearly 100% of the Lagos Eko graduates with jobs.
52
UN MDG Database, 2013.

36

Foundational/Cross Cutting Cluster:
Management

Governance and Public Sector

CPS outcomes
Outcome indicators
Enhanced
 # states and the Federal Government with an integrated fully
transparency on
functioning financial information system producing and publishing
budget execution
consolidated quarterly financial statements within 14 days of end of
in targeted states
each fiscal quarter (Baseline: 0 in 2012; target: federal Government and
and at Federal
8 supported states in 2017)
level
 # of states that have adopted procurement law increased from 24 in
2013 to 30 in 2017
 % of public procurement contracts above threshold awarded through
open competition in 12 states increased from 30 % in 2013 to 75% in
2017.
Improved quality  Increased availability of official statistics to all users at federal and state
and accessibility
level as measured by 40 percent increase in the number of states with
of the statistics
State Statistical Yearbook which is less than 3 years old (Baseline: 14
States, 2013)
 40 percent increase in the number of statistical thematic areas where
internationally agreed concepts and standards are applied at federal and
state level (Baseline: 7 areas, 2013).
98. Governance has been at the center of the Bank’s engagement and country strategies
since the transition to democracy in 1999 and has gradually evolved and deepened. The
focus on strengthening public financial management systems and public sector reform more
generally at federal level has gradually expanded to also include support to (a) the
implementation of the Nigeria Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (NEITI), and (b) to
improving public finance management and governance in states. Concurrently, emphasis on
sector governance has been increasing. This CPS will continue supporting the NEITI, including
data handling, standardization, quality control, and trend analysis, and other efforts related to the
NEITI process, such as outreach and sensitization of professional accounting bodies, auditing
and accounting firms, and the Bureau of Public Procurement. The CPS will also continue to
consolidate support aimed at strengthening public financial management at federal and state
levels while scaling up previous experiences in sector operations by mainstreaming institution
building, political economy considerations and efforts to strengthen good governance into the
portfolio. Investment lending and grant support for public financial management reforms will
increase through operations already approved by the World Bank and other development
partners. The geographic coverage of the engagement will expand. Cooperation with partners to
improve governance will be strengthened under the CAF and the close cooperation between the
Bank and DFID, currently anchored in the Governance Partnership Facility framework, will
continue. The WBG direct engagement with anti-corruption entities will be scaled down in light
of the substantial engagement by other CAF development partners.

37

PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
99. Continuing commitment is critical for strengthening public financial management
and policy formulation and implementation at all levels of Government. Notwithstanding the
progress in initiating important reforms at both federal and state levels during the last CPS, the
remaining reform agenda is large. The continuing Bank support to improving PFM systems in 21
states will help strengthen the fundamentals for improved service delivery, which inter alia, is
expected to facilitate gains in human development outcomes, growth and competitiveness.
Exploratory PFM capacity building activities will be initiated within a limited number of local
authorities. Part of the engagement with the Federal Government will continue to focus on
effective macroeconomic and reserve management.
100. The CPS will help enhance transparency in budget execution in targeted states and at
Federal level by: (a) offering on-demand technical assistance to specific technical areas; (b)
promoting greater transparency over budget planning and execution; (c) continuing the dialogue
on the importance of 'good enough' financial management with a range of stakeholders, (d)
continuing the support to budget monitoring platforms and facilitating their engagement in multistakeholder dialogues, (e) expanding the scope of GIFMIS at the federal and state levels to
reduce budget fragmentation, and enhance spending controls through all stages of budget
execution and (f) strengthen treasury management and improve the efficiency of budget
execution. Attention will be given to the sequencing and interconnectedness of reforms. While
some financial management reforms can be embedded in sector operations others require
changes to overall systems and regulatory frameworks. These activities will be targeted at both
federal and state levels. At the federal level, new lending support will be available in advancing
the PFM reform agenda. At the state level, the Bank’s support is anchored in the ongoing
investment operations in 21 states. The WB will continue to make available support to state-level
development policy operations (Lagos DPO2 and 3, Edo Growth and Employment Operation 2)
as a strong vehicle for deep engagement at the state level, particularly for improving public
financial management.
101. Building on engagement under the previous CPS, public procurement is identified as
a special area of focus in the CPS. Important reform progress was made in the area of
procurement in the last CPS. The legislative framework is now in place at federal level and in 24
states, while the remaining 12 states are at various stages of this reform engagement. The next
stage is support to the implementation of the frameworks. The WB will facilitate e-procurement,
the use of framework contracts, standard bidding documents, and self-assessments of
procurement policy and practices. Assistance will be provided through capacity building
initiatives including technical assistance and South-South learning activities focusing on lessons
from other countries. Support will continue for independent, third-party monitoring of
procurement processes in various MDA at both the Federal and in targeted state levels.
102. Multi-sectoral teams will ensure that institutional strengthening, including public
financial management, is embedded in sector engagements. The WB’s sector engagement
during the previous CPS has increasingly incorporated institutional strengthening and public
financial management. For example, the engagement on social safety nets and in the health
sector will seek to strengthen the functioning of existing institutions and financial
management arrangements.

38

103. An important element in the general PFM engagement will be the facilitation of
state-to-state comparison and learning. Taking into account approaches and lessons from
Bank work in other Regions as well as previous initiatives in Nigeria, efforts will be made
to facilitate communities of practice with relevant stakeholders at the state level across the
PFM cycle.
IMPROVED QUALITY AND ACCESSIBILITY OF STATISTICS
104. The poor quality of data and statistics in Nigeria undermine the quality of policy
design and dialogue across all sectors. Although the use of statistically rigorous impact
evaluation is increasing, most notably in the health sector, capacity in the use of this tool to
improve the management and effectiveness of policies and programs remains highly limited.
105. To address these issues, the WBG will provide new lending support for building a
modern effective statistical system in Nigeria (Annex 5), and continue supporting the work
on the Service Delivery Indicators package of tools and public expenditure tracking like
instruments. The aim is to improve the quality and accessibility of the evidence base for
decision making. Support to statistical capacity building, which will generate results after this
CPS period, will emphasize long-term institutional strengthening through a multi-donor
approach, as opposed to support for individual surveys and analyses. Additionally, the impact
evaluation will continue to be used to complement statistics and monitoring and evaluation in
order to advance the science of delivery and promote a culture of results. This engagement will
feed into a longer-term agenda aimed at improving the basis for decision making and feedback
on growth and competitiveness as well as on the inclusion agenda. One important priority is to
improve the methodologies and accuracy of core economic statistics in Nigeria. The WBG is
currently cooperating with the IMF on the GDP rebasing exercise that should significantly
improve the methodology for determining the national accounts and GDP in Nigeria. This model
can potentially be further developed and extended to other areas of core statistics.
106. Further, the WBG will continue its TA support on Open Government and Open Data
to the Federal Government and targeted states. The aim of this support is to enable greater
participation by citizens and improve transparency and collaboration, including via various ICT
platforms. These efforts will build on the successful launch of the Open Data Initiative at the
federal level and in Edo State, and are expected to facilitate more effective communication flows
among government departments and between the government and the public.
STRENGTHENING OVERSIGHT AND SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY
107. Legislative oversight of the executive is evolving at the federal level and is very
uneven at the state level. A key element of good governance and sometimes an important driver
of PFM reforms, strengthening legislative oversight could have transformative potential in
Nigeria by (a) strengthening the credibility of the elected houses, (b) strengthening the quality of
oversight, and (c) creating needed legislative support for the PFM reform agenda.
108. The WB will provide TA support to the National House of Assembly and State
Houses of Assembly to strengthen the quality of their involvement in the PFM cycle.
Participation in national and international peer-to-peer networks will be facilitated. Trainings
will be provided (especially to committee clerks and other staff) and work with the embryonic
National Budget and Research office will be intensified in close cooperation with other
39

development partners. This engagement will aim at improving the overall governance
environment for development but also more specifically at strengthening the demand and support
for public financial management reforms.
109. The strategy will continue to harness civil society for development effectiveness
through the use of social accountability mechanisms piloted during the previous CPS. At
the policy level, the CPS will continue supporting a dialogue around open government and open
data, and targeted initiatives on procurement reform, open budget, freedom of information and
health reform. At the project level, efforts will continue to support greater transparency,
participation, leveraging innovative ICT tools for targeted beneficiary feedback and third party
monitoring in the agriculture, health, education and urban sectors. In an effort to improve the
internal transparency and accountability of civil society itself, capacity building support will be
provided to non-state actors, including specialized support to governance-specific CSOs.
110. Understanding that demand for good governance and social accountability also stems
from a sense of identity, investment and aspiration on the part of the citizenry, the Bank
will continue to promote policy dialogue and targeted interventions aimed at promoting
social cohesion, nation building and “voices for change”. This will build on previous efforts
focused on gender inclusion and targeted support women’s coalitions. It will build on efforts to
support coalitions of CSOs that focus on a range of governance issues in order to aggregate voice
and promote broad-based networks for reform. Finally, it will build on targeted efforts to support
initiatives that aim to promote social cohesion and ‘positive’ identities- such as previous support
for key cultural events.
MAINSTREAMING POLITICAL ECONOMY AND GOVERNANCE INTO THE BANK’S ENGAGEMENT
IN NIGERIA
111. With a view to improving the Bank’s effectiveness, a Programmatic Approach to
Governance has been developed and will be rolled out during the CPS period. The
approach, developed over a year with buy-in from the country team and accompanied by highlevel technical work, has the following key elements:







Political economy analysis of the macro, sector and project levels will help improve the
WB’s understanding of governance and political economy constraints to development in
Nigeria and thus the design and implementation of operations.
A Governance, Conflict and Gender filter will support task teams in better identifying
problems and assumptions in approaches, understanding local contexts, learning lessons
from the past, measuring reform potential, ensuring that fiduciary and corruption risks are
addressed, and setting in place tracking mechanisms that will make it easier to engage a
broader range of actors, learn throughout the project cycle, recognize risks and
implementation challenges, and react accordingly, with increased flexibility.
Specifically on facilitating social accountability and the demand for good governance, the
filter is intended to ensure that operations: (a) are designed to promote and facilitate
citizens engagement in the reform process; (b) support beneficiary assessments and
feedback and promote third-party monitoring; (c) allow for iterative improvements in
design and implementation based on (a) and (b).
In the area of conflict, the filter is intended to ensure that operations (a) are designed to
mitigate conflicts in locations where operations are implemented, (b) clearly identify risks
40





of augmenting conflicts and include mitigating features, and (c) in designing supervision
arrangements, take into account the potential impact of violent conflict for staff safety,
fiduciary risks and ability to facilitate implementation.
In the area of gender, the filter will seek to support analysis and consultation on genderrelated issues as part of project preparation and implementation. Specifically, the aim is to
ensure that projects, where relevant, support specific actions to reduce potential differentiated
impact of the project activities, address the distinct needs of women and girls, or men and
boys, or narrow the gender gaps. The design of the gender filter builds on the Gender in
Fadama Research Project (2012) and the Nigeria Gender Portfolio Review (2012) and their
recommendations for the better inclusion of gender in the Bank’s projects in Nigeria.
Following on lessons learned from the previous CPS, the WB has constituted an external
Governance Consultation Group, increasing its external outreach and consultation. The
Group consists of eminent Nigerians, reflecting the diversity of Nigerian society. Its
objective is to provide real time advice on local contexts to management and task teams.

112. The governance filter ultimately seeks to improve the capacity of the Bank to deliver
results and will be implemented through an interdisciplinary committee. The committee will
include financial management, procurement and monitoring and evaluation colleagues, in
addition to the Country Management Unit (CMU) and a governance expert. The roll-out of the
filter will require a number of changes to the incentives, resources and accountability
mechanisms for the country team as well as additional attention to tailoring and adapting to
evolving local context at the project level.

IV.D. Implementing the FY2014-2017 Country Partnership Strategy
Financing Sources
113. In order to keep the flexibility mentioned previously, the WBG is proposing a welldefined program for the first two years (US$3.1 billion IDA and US$1.6 billion IBRD)
(Table 4). For the outer years, the program will be based on the outcome of the AAA and the
priorities defined by the new government. Overall IBRD/IDA financing will average about US$2
billion per year over the CPS period, and additional support will be provided by IFC and MIGA.
The IDA amounts in the first year of the CPS are based on allocations in IDA16. Actual
allocations will depend on (a) the country's own performance; (b) its performance relative to
other IDA recipients; (c) the total amount of resources available to IDA; (d) any changes in the
list of IDA-eligible countries; (e) any changes in the performance-based allocation system for
IDA17, and (f) the overall size of the IDA17 replenishment.53 The indicative IBRD financing
envelope over the four years period under this CPS is US$2.9 billion. In addition, Nigeria’s
support under this CPS includes an indicative trust fund financing of about US$200 million and
Analytical and Advisory Activities, which are set out in Table 5.

53

As Nigeria is no longer IDA-only, it will not be eligible for compensatory reallocations from MDRI
netting out assuming this mechanism is carried forward into IDA17. IDA’s lending terms will also be
hardened from FY14 to IDA blend terms, reflecting Nigeria’s level of income.

41

Table 4: Proposed Lending Program
FY2014
FY2015
IDA
IBRD IDA IBRD
Structural Reforms for Growth and Jobs
Programmatic Energy Sector Support
400
700
Programmatic Financing for Development Support
300
500
Programmatic Agriculture and Climate Change (Resilience) Support
676
100
Quality and Efficiency of Social Services Delivery for Increased Social Inclusion
Programmatic Social Inclusion/Safety Net Support
140
500
Education/Skills
112
Health
300
Water
250
Governance and Public Sector Management
Lagos Programmatic DPO 2 and 3
200
200
Edo Growth and Employment Operation 2
75
Federal level support to PFM/Statistics
200
Total
1,678*
400 1,375
1200

IDA/IBRD in US$ Million

*includes approximately US$71.4 million cancelled and recommitted
114. The CPS will optimize and diversify lending instruments in support of the proposed
lending program. In addition to traditional investment lending, the proposed program includes
development policy support to states to support multi-sectoral solutions with a focus on growth
and poverty. At the federal level, DPOs will be available to support implementation of
agricultural policy reforms and possibly also to support activities in the area of disaster risk
management/climate change. Similar, possible state-level DPOs will support the reform agenda
at the state level, building on the previous CPS. The WB will continue to emphasize
performance-based approaches in investment lending, notably in the human development sector
where a Program for Results (P4R) operation is proposed in the health sector. IBRD lending may
be supported using various instruments, such as DPOs and Guarantees. Presently, the
Government has requested that much of IBRD support be directed to the financing for
development support, and to the power sector, to leverage private sector investment through
partial risk guarantees. .
115. While the overall ratio of trust funds (TFs) vs. IDA assistance for Nigeria is low, TFs
have been providing important support. Over the last three fiscal years, total commitments
under recipient-executed trust funds (RETFs) amount to $182.19 million, while cumulative
disbursements amounted to US$95.57 million. The Polio Buy-Down Program, the largest trust
fund, has provided critically important support to eradicating polio in Nigeria. Statistics for
Development TF is supporting the Bank’s engagement in the statistics area. Much of the impact
evaluation activities are trust-funded, such as earlier mentioned impact evaluation under the
Nigeria Health Sector Investment Project. Support from the Global Facility for Disaster
Reduction and Recovery provided a vehicle for mobilizing and responding to the Government’s
request for support after 2012 flooding. The Nigeria program continues to benefit from the
GFDRR support. Another example is the Governance Partnership Facility – it supported the
development of the Governance Approach and continues to play an important role in the WBG
engagement in the governance and public management area.

42

Table 5: CPS Indicative Knowledge Services Program, FY2014-2015
Engagement Area
FY2014
FY2015
1st Strategic Cluster: Federally led structural reforms for growth and Jobs
Financing for Development
 Inclusive Finance
 Inclusive Markets
 ICA Drivers to Jobs Growth
Agriculture and Climate Change
 Trade in Agricultural Markets
(Resilience)
(TFF)
 PDNA and Recovery Framework
 TA support to climate resilient
development along the Benue
river basin
2nd Strategic Cluster: Quality and Efficiency of Social Services Delivery for Inclusive Growth
 Programmatic Poverty Work
 Education Programmatic
AAA
 Jobs Assessment Nigeria
 Service Delivery Indicators.
Foundational/Cross-Cutting Cluster: Governance and Public Sector Management
Public Financial Management
 Value Chain Analysis
(Procurement)
 Improved PFM
 State Governance
Benchmarking
Strengthening Oversight and Social
 Nigerian National Assembly
Accountability
 Open Government Technology
Framework.
Cross-Cutting Knowledge Work
 Nigeria Urbanization Review
 Nigeria Economic Report
 Programmatic Poverty Work  Northern Governors dialogue
 Demographic Dynamics
 Jobs Assessment.

116. As already discussed, knowledge work plays an important role in the CPS program.
The work planned in FY2014-2015 will provide further selective support as well as the platform
for engaging with the new Government. For this engagement, the CPS will develop a strong
knowledge platform around the poverty, jobs, inclusive finance and markets, education/skills,
safety nets, and urbanization issues (Table 5).

Portfolio Management
117. Portfolio implementation experienced challenges during FY2013 mainly due to the
delay in the approval of the 2012 Borrowing Plan by the National Assembly of Nigeria.
This, in turn, caused delays in signing the Financing Agreements for 7 projects, delayed
effectiveness of 8 projects, and an increase in the number of problem projects. Yet, in spite
of those challenges, the Country Team achieved 19.5 percent disbursement rate by end
FY2013, which is a significant achievement. Following the approval of the Borrowing Plan,
all projects approved have become effective and the portfolio implementation is expected to
further improve.
118. The CMU has put in place a robust portfolio management mechanism. The key
elements of that mechanism include: (a) an implementation support team (IST) consisting of
43

country operational staff to work with project teams to address challenges; (b) rigorous periodic
assessments with multi-sector task teams to pro-actively determine issues in key operational
areas and offer solutions; (c) monthly portfolio monitoring reports; (d) bi-weekly portfolio
meetings of the CMU leadership team (the CMU and sector leaders); (e) periodic meetings with
Project Coordinators and Task Team Leaders; (f) on-boarding events, capacity building
programs and hands-on clinics to support clients and project teams; and (g) Country Program
Performance Reviews (CPPRs) at project, zonal and national levels to identify and resolve
operational issues. The recently-completed zonal CPPRs covering all geopolitical zones have
fostered renewed momentum, greater ownership and better alignment of IDA programs with
state programs and priorities.

Financial Management and Procurement Systems
119. Nigeria is making progress in improving its financial management systems, but
important reforms are still pending. The GIFMIS for budget execution has been established
across 207 federal Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), and a new Cash Management
Policy has reduced interest costs arising from Central Bank advances to finance the budget.
There has also been progress at the federal level and in some states in reducing submission time
for monthly and annual financial statements. Reforms in budget classification are ongoing, and a
new GFS/COFOG compliant chart of accounts will allow the Government to record all sources
of funding and report more details of transactions. However, Government has yet to (a) amend
the Finance (Management and Control) Act of 1958, the organic PFM law, to better reflect
current financial management requirements; or (b) the Audit Act, to strengthen the functions and
independence of the federal Auditor General; or (c) transition from prepayment internal audit
method to the risk-based method.
120. Nigeria has also improved its procurement policies and practices and strengthened
procurement capacity at the federal and state levels. A Public Procurement Act has been
enacted at the federal level and procurement laws are in place in 24 States. Regulatory agencies
and cadres of public procurement professionals have been established, and a range of
procurement tools have strengthened budget planning and efficient implementation. At the
federal level alone, these improvements have resulted in savings of N572 billion (US$3.7 billion)
in 2012 compared to 2011.54
121. These improvements have enabled greater use of country systems for the
procurement of goods, works and services. For instance, the National Standard Bidding
Documents are now used by Bank-financed projects for National Competitive Bidding without
exceptions, because of their improved quality. The market has responded with increased
participation in bidding for contracts funded by both Government and Bank leading to more
competition and cost reduction. The WB will continue to work with authorities to address any
remaining weakness in the procurement system, to further increase the use of country system in
WB-funded project.

54

BPP Summary of Contract Awards Against 2012 Capital Allocation Budget.

44

Monitoring and Evaluation and Advancing the Science of Delivery
122. The CPS outcomes have been carefully chosen to ensure that they are measureable
and that progress can be monitored and assessed. Each project will have its own monitoring
framework with gender-disaggregated and conflict data, where appropriate, and civil society
monitoring will be promoted to enable citizens to hold local officials to account. Together with
the CAF partners, the WB will explore opportunities for supporting the Government in building
coherent and effective national M&E systems.
123. The CPS will place emphasis on advancing the ‘science of delivery’. Its program of
impact evaluation aims at (a) improving the effectiveness and operational efficiency of
specific policies and programs, and (b) promoting the use of impact evaluation more broadly
as a tool for evidence-based policymaking and to build knowledge, including around
effective use of ICT in support of service delivery. Impact evaluation cuts across key themes
in the CPS principles of engagement, including innovative and catalytic interventions,
knowledge, and the delivery of results, and will be used to complement statistics to advance
the science of delivery and promote a culture of results. The WB will also use the Country
Team meetings, Country Portfolio Performance Reviews and CAF framework to capture the
knowledge, experience and learning collected by project teams and country partners during
implementation.
124. An effective communication strategy will aim at raising awareness of relevant
stakeholders and the general public on the CPS program to foster their participation in
implementation. The communication strategy will be mainstreamed in all lending operations
from conception to completion to enhance project performance and achieve development
objectives. The CPS will emphasize regular and consistent briefing of policy makers key
Government officials on project processes and results. There will also be capacity building in
strategic communications for Project Implementation Units and show-casing of results to
stakeholders to enhance buy-in, support and participation. The communication strategy will also
address issues of lack of awareness and understanding of WB projects and activities, as indicated
by the 2013 client survey.

Partnerships
125. The CPS is embedded within the broader Country Assistance Framework (CAF)
(Annex 8). The partnership arrangement under the previous CPS with DFID, AFDB, and USAID
was expanded to include other partners and led to the development of a comprehensive CAF.
CAF partners currently include African Development Bank, Canadian International
Development Agency, European Union, French Development Agency, Department for
International Development (UK), Embassy of Brazil and Embassy of China in Nigeria, High
Commission of India in Nigeria, International Monetary Fund, Japan International Cooperation
Agency, the Agencies of the UN, particularly UNDP and UNICEF, USAID and WBG.
126. The CAF is proving as very effective in furthering the coordination and synergies
among partners’ strategies of support to Nigeria. For the first time, AFD, CIDA, EU, USAID
and WB jointly consulted with the Federal Government, private sector, civil society and media
on their respective country strategies.

45

127. The WBG will collaborate with CAF partners to enhance the role of knowledge
partnerships in building capacity at the state level, furthering the federal Government’s reform
agenda and developing platforms for engagement in new areas such as job creation, socioeconomic development in the North, and urbanization. CAF partners have also agreed to
establish a coordination forum on governance to ensure sharing of knowledge and operational
lessons and to enhance cooperation. DFID and the WB initiated a closer cooperation through the
Global Partnership Facility towards the end of the previous CPS period. This partnership is
expected to continue in the new CPS period with DFID continuing to support the mainstreaming
of the governance agenda across the portfolio.
128. The WBG will also promote knowledge partnerships on the science of delivery. It will
continue partnering with CSOs on third-party monitoring of WB-funded projects. Such
monitoring provides valuable insights into the dynamics among stakeholders during project
implementation, and into qualitative factors that affect project performance. The WB will use the
framework of Country Portfolio Performance Review to promote learning across projects and
implementation units. Additionally, together with the CAF partners, the WB will support
knowledge exchange among states in the areas of capacity building, project implementation,
impact evaluation, and beneficiary feedback to strengthen project design and execution. The
platform is expected to help in building/strengthening the capacity of states from all geopolitical
zones in the country.

V. MANAGING RISKS
129. There are several risks to the CPS implementation, including economic volatility
related to the fluctuation of oil prices and decline in oil output, a political situation that will
become more fluid leading to the 2015 elections, in-country violence and insecurity, the
opposition of vested interests to reform, and instability in the region.
130. Given the high dependence of the country's external balance and consolidated budget
on oil, Nigeria is vulnerable to fluctuations in oil prices or output. Although Nigeria has been
protecting itself against oil price volatility by maintaining a fiscal reserve, it is still quite
vulnerable to macroeconomic risks related to oil. Thus, there is potential for an external shock to
the macroeconomic picture that could change the nature of Government priorities and the
demand for WB assistance very quickly. This CPS recognizes that the immediate policy
priorities of the Government could shift very quickly due to this uncertainty, and therefore
adopts a flexible approach that allows the WB to respond dynamically in the case of significant
exogenous shocks. The WB will continue to make policy recommendations that support prudent
macroeconomic management as the key to providing fiscal space for the Government to adjust
appropriately to external shocks if and when they occur.
131. Macroeconomic risks have increased in 2013. A largely unexpected decline in oil output
in the first half of 2013 of roughly 10%, together with somewhat weaker oil prices, have
tightened the budgetary and balance of payments situation in the country. In this context, the
balance of the fiscal reserve declined from US$9 to US$5 billion during the first half of 2013 and
the balance of payments surplus that the country had been generating since September 2011 has
disappeared. Gross foreign reserves remained at close to US$47 billion from February through
early September, 2013. An additional potential source of volatility in this context is significant
short-term portfolio inflows that have sought to exploit high interest rates (12-14%) in the
46

context of expected exchange rate stability. The increasing proximity of the presidential
elections, which are typically associated with measurably higher budgetary spending, is yet
another factor that complicates this picture.
132. The WB will stand ready to adjust to shifting priorities of the Government related to
a worsening of the macroeconomic picture. If the oil output does not stabilize, or oil prices
decline significantly, Nigeria may find itself in need of a macroeconomic adjustment and without
the fiscal reserve to support planned budgetary outlays. On the positive side, Nigeria’s sovereign
debt position is still quite strong, with external debt at only 3% of GDP and domestic debt at
16%. Given these risks, the WB will keep the flexibility to shift emphasis to budget support or
other operations that may become highly demanded by the client, likely in support of key
reforms and institutions that could help insulate the country better from macroeconomic
volatility in the future.
133. The evolving and volatile security situation in Northeastern Nigeria represents a
significant risk to the CPS implementation. In early 2013, Boko Haram shifted its strategy
from conducting insurgent attacks on Government installations to establishing control over
swathes of territory of far northeast Borno state. The recent state of emergency in the three
affected states have displaced civilians and militants alike, raising the risk of pushing fighters to
other states within Nigeria or over the border to Cameroon or Niger, out of the reach of the
security services. The counter-insurgency campaign will likely last at least through the full six
months allowed by the statute but the threat of terrorism and armed conflict will persist beyond
that period, as it did the recent state of emergency (January-June 2012). In addition to the
terrorist threat in the northeast, further risk to the implementation of the CPS is manifested in the
criminal activity along the north-south corridor and communal violence that affects the middle
belt of the country, from Zamfara to Nasarawa and Taraba. Finally, the kidnapping for ransom
and express kidnapping risk in the southern part of the country further impedes partners’ ability
to deliver and supervise projects, especially in the Delta region.
134. There are three key elements of the WB’s strategy in mitigating the adverse effect of
the security situation on its portfolio: 1) agreement with the federal and state Governments to
modify/restructure projects and reallocate (on a competitive basis) funds to other states under
the same projects, should there be no improvement in the security situation over an agreed and
clearly defined period of time (this practice is already in place); 2) utilization of the 3rd party
monitoring should WB staff not be able to travel/visit the project areas (this practice is already in
place); and 3) within the CAF framework, dialogues with the Government and CAF partners, so
as to be fully informed and up-to-date on the security situation. Should violence escalate,
creating implementation difficulties for CPS implementation, necessary adjustments to the
program will be made in consultation with the Government. Additionally, the WB will monitor
security challenges in the Sahel Region, their developmental impact in the sub-region and
potential implications for Nigeria, and will dialogue with the Government in that respect,
drawing on the WB’s strategy for Sahel and the commitment of the Nigeria Government and
ECOWAS member states to promote peace and security in the Sahel.
135. Gaps in capacity, especially at the sub-national level, and institutional weaknesses
continue to pose challenges to the successful implementation of the CPS program: The
increasingly transformative nature of the program pushes the boundaries of public sector
expertise and brings to light systemic issues that pose challenges to successful implementation,
such as lack of coherent approach to monitoring and evaluation, contract and project
47

management, and effective use of resources. Continuing attention will be needed to support
implementation of institutional reforms, adequate staffing, regulatory strengthening, and
practices and systems for better project management. Likewise, the Bank remains vigilant as
regards corruption risks to the implementation of its portfolio. New projects will seek to address
this concern through focused technical assistance, but increased efforts are needed to build
capacity in local agencies to ensure longer-term sustainability of ongoing projects. Better
collection of data is critical to effective and evidence-based monitoring and evaluation, which in
turn helps strengthen the focus on results.
136. Finally, the lack of clarity regarding the preparation of the Government’s external
borrowing plan and delays in its approval could pose risks to successful implementation of
the CPS. The WB will manage these risks by engaging with the Government on how best to
align its annual assistance cycle with the Government’s processes and practices for external
borrowing. In addition, as part of its strategy to reach out to its main stakeholders, the WB will
deepen its engagement with the National Assembly, particularly the committees in charge of aid
and donor agencies. Most of the FY14 operations are already approved in the 2013 Borrowing
Plan. The remaining ones will be submitted in the 2014 Borrowing Plan with the 2014 Budget.

48

ANNEX 1: RESULTS MATRIX

Country
Development
Goals

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
First Strategic Cluster: Federally-led Structural Reform Agendas for Growth and Jobs

Engagement Area: Power Sector Reform
Nigeria’s electricity consumers,
Increase the
including the poor, are provided
power
generation and with unreliable service due to poor
quality of supply, high losses and a
transmission
lack of generation capacity to
capacity; and
service demand.
improve the
efficiency of
electricity
delivery and
access to
modern
lighting for
the base-ofthe-pyramid

The transmission system remains a
key bottleneck to a successful sector
reform. The existing wheeling
capacity is estimated at 4,800 MW
while demand is over 10,000 MW.
The Government’s investments in
new power plants are therefore in
risk of becoming stranded.
The Nigerian distribution network is
heavily dilapidated with high losses,
poor voltage profile and inaccurate
metering and billing functions.
The poorest rely on kerosene lamps
for light at high cost and poor

1. Increased power generation
and transmission capacity.
Outcome Indicators
16 percent increase in generation
capacity supported by the WBG
interventions by 2017 (Baseline:
6000MW in 2012)
8 percent increase in transmission
capacity (Baseline: 8588 MVA on
330kV level in 2013)
2. Improved the efficiency of
electricity delivery
Outcome Indicators
Aggregate Technical and
Commercial losses (AT&C) of
privatized distribution companies
(DISCOs) supported by the WBG.
EBP reduced by 8 percentage points
from 25% in 2013 to 17% in 2017.
(Baseline subject to revision
following post privatization
verification exercise in 2014)
49

Financing
Ongoing: NEGIP IDA, NEGIP
Guarantee,
New: Power Sector Guarantees Project,
Transmission and Access Project; Gas
Sector Development Project, joint
IDA-IFC-MIGA Energy Business Plan
(EBP)
IFC Investment
IFC investments (project development
funding, equity, mezzanine and debt)
in IPPs, gas infrastructure, and select
privatized generation and distribution
companies

Country
Development
Goals

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
quality while exposing themselves
to safety hazards such as fires and
explosions.

3. Improved access to modern
lighting for the base-of-the –
pyramid through supporting the
value chain of procuring and
distributing solar products such
as lanterns and cook-stoves
Outcome Indicator
1 million solar lanterns distributed;
5 million people with improved
energy services (assumes industry
estimate of 5 people per household)
100,000 tCO2 being GHG avoided
(Key assumptions: (i) kerosene
lamp emission factor (t/Coe/ltr) =
0.0026 (ii) kerosene consumption
per year for a lantern = 55 ltrs (iii)
solar lantern to kerosene lamp
displacement factor = 70% )

IDA-IFC Advisory Services
program: Lighting Africa AS
Program

Engagement Area: Agriculture Productivity and Climate Change (Resilience)
Promote
competitive,
sustainable
and modern
agriculture to
contribute to
job creation

Limited access of small farmers to
inputs (seeds, fertilizers),
technology, information, modern
methods and mechanization limits
agriculture productivity and increase
in income of rural households.
Significant infrastructural

4. Improved access of small
farmers to inputs and
technology, and increase in
their average income
Outcome Indicator:
Increased effectiveness of publicly
50

Financing
Ongoing: Fadama 3, Commercial
Agricultural Development Project,
Agriculture DPO1, Fadama 3, RAMP 1
and RAMP 2, Nigeria Erosion and
Watershed Management Project

Country
Development
Goals
and poverty
reduction.
Improve
transportation
networks for
agricultural
markets.
Reduce the
vulnerability
of Nigeria’s
agriculture
sector to land
degradation,
natural
disasters and
climate
change

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
deficiencies in the large scale
irrigation sector impact agricultural
productivity, notably in northern
Nigeria where the bulk of Nigeria’s
dam and irrigation infrastructure is
located.

supported seed and fertilizer
distribution systems as measured by
the increased number of farmers
benefiting from those programs
(Baseline: 30% in 2012; Target:
60% in 2017).

Inadequate transportation networks
hinder market connectivity.

Additional 20,000 hectares of
improved irrigation in North and
North-West areas (baseline 26,000
ha 2014; target 46,000 in 2017).

Poor roads infrastructure makes it
difficult to access urban and
agricultural markets.
Small farmers have difficulty in
entering farming contracts, due to
limited production scale, weak
bargaining power and high
transaction cost. This represents a
challenge for the Government
efforts to promote inclusive value
chain modernization of the
agricultural sector in Nigeria.
The Southeast suffers widespread
erosion, and land degradation and
environmental insecurity are also
accelerating in the arid and semiarid North.
Nigeria’s disaster profile is
characterized by extreme hydro-

Rural households in supported
Fadama areas reporting 40%
increase in average household
income (Baseline: N184,240 in
2013: Target N257,937 by 2016).
5. Improved horizontal
coordination of small farmers
Outcome Indicator:
Number of farmer associations and
or marketing cooperatives
established in supported areas.
(Baseline: 0 in 2013: Target 7,400
in 2017).
6. Improved road transportation
connectivity of rural markets
51

New: Agriculture DPO2, Irrigation
Project, Agriculture/Agribusiness
Project, Rural economic inclusion
project; Ibadan Flood Rehabilitation
Project
AAA: Spatial Analysis TA.
IFC Investment
IFC investments for input suppliers
(seed, fertilizer, and pesticides),
agricultural equipment leasing/hiring
companies, food processing,
agricultural commodity trading, joint
ventures with financial institutions
targeting the agricultural sector.
IFC Advisory
IFC A2F Core Banking and Agri
Finance Advisory Program;
interventions to include training;
Investment Climate Program, Support
to SCPZs. Specialized modules.
modules and Business Edge

Country
Development
Goals

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
meteorological events, which are
expected to increase in frequency
and magnitude due to climate
change.

Outcome Indicator:
Additional 2,000 km or rural roads
rehabilitated in supported states
(incremental indicator, baseline 0).

Nigeria’s monitoring and early
warning systems and its response
mechanisms are not well developed.
In addition, Nigeria’s flood
protection infrastructure is
insufficient and poorly maintained.

Additional 2 million people in rural
areas gained access to an all-season
road in supported states
(incremental indicator, baseline 0).
7. Enhanced country’s
preparedness to respond to
natural hazards, climate risks
and natural disasters
(resilience)
Outcome indicators:
# ha of land treated for erosion
(Baseline: 0 ha; Target: 2,800 ha).
% of upgraded or new HydroMet
stations providing data that are
published annually and uploaded to
the web (Baseline: 0%; Target:
60%).

Engagement Area: Financing For Development
The SME finance gap is estimated at 8. Expanded financing
Support
SME’s growth 1 million SMEs and requiring up to
opportunities for SMEs
$22 billion. Their limited access to
and survival.
Outcome indicators
finance impedes their growth and
52

Financing:
Ongoing: Growth and Employment
(GEM) project

Country
Development
Goals

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
survival.

Additional 100,000 loans provided
to SMEs by 2017 by IFC.
Additional 2 million micro
entrepreneurs provided with
financial services by IFC.

New Development Finance,
Competitiveness Project (EU TF)
AAA: TA Reform of the Nigeria
Development Finance Sector; Inclusive
Financial markets
IFC Advisory Services: Efficient
Securities Market & Institutional
Development AS program;
IFC A2F Core Banking Advisory
Program; Business Edge, Capacity
building programs with banks
MFI advisory services; supporting
banks to provide unsecured credit lines
to viable MFIs
IFC-DFID SME Program:
Includes financing to banks focused on
SME lending, improving financial
infrastructure and expanding SME
solutions.

Increase
supply of
long-term
financing to
promote nonoil sectors
with strong

Nigeria faces an enormous longterm financing gap, which is
significantly hampering its
economic growth potential. This gap
relates particularly to the financing
of infrastructure, including housing.
Mobilization of private sources of

9. Improved supply of longer
term financing

Financing
Ongoing: Housing Finance

Outcome Indicator

New: Development Finance, SME
Inclusive Finance

Percentage of long term financing
>24 months of outstanding private
sector credit increased to 5% of the
53

IFC Investments

Country
Development
Goals
growth and
job creation
potential, such
as housing,
agriculture,
for example

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
funds through such instruments as
the proposed liquidity facility for
housing and public private
partnerships (PPPs), as well as pure
private arrangements, is critical to
meeting these needs.

total private sector credit.
Percentage of housing finance loans
in the financial sector increased to
5% of the total loans

Direct debt instruments, warehouse
facilities, PCGs, and risk sharing
arrangements; MFI investments

Volume of corporate bond issues
increased on average to 2 issues
every year.

Second Strategic Cluster: Quality, Effectiveness and Efficiency of Social Service Delivery at State Level for Greater Social
Inclusion
Engagement Area: Strengthening Community Driven Mechanisms for Social Inclusion, and Effectiveness of Social Protection
Programs
Improve
effectiveness
of social
protection
programs

Low coverage of existing programs,
the implementation of only a narrow
set of instruments, poor service
delivery, and the fragmentation of
approaches and projects across the
country.

Improve
access of poor
to social and
economic
services

Most of public expenditure on social
services and assistance programs are
untargeted.
Large share of the population,
particularly in rural areas and in the
northern Nigeria, is vulnerable to
falling into poverty due to shocks
and have limited access to social and
economic services.

10. Improved targeting of social
protection and increased
employment readiness of
youth in supported states.
Outcome Indicator:
Improved targeting of social
protection programs in states as
measured by the # of states using
the unified registry of beneficiaries
and common targeting mechanism
(Baseline 0; Target 10 in 2017)
Enhanced resilience of the youth
participating in workfare programs
in supported states as measured by
the number of youths who received
54

Lending:
Ongoing: Community and Social
Development (CSDP), Youth
Employment and Social Support
Operation (YESSO), State Expenditure
Effectiveness for Results (SEEFOR)
New: CSDP Additional Financing,
Social Safety/Inclusion Operation
AAA
Programmatic Poverty Assessment,
Sharing Prosperity in Nigeria: An
Analytical Work Program on Jobs and
Social Protection

Country
Development
Goals

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
orientation and life skills training
(baseline 0; Target 100,000 by
2017)
Increased in % of poor beneficiaries
(lowest quintiles) from targeted
poor households receiving cash
transfers (Baseline 0 in 2013; Target
40% by 2017)
11. Increased Access of Poor and
Vulnerable to Social and
Economic Services
Outcome Indicator
50 percent increase in the # of poor
households with access to social
and livelihood support services
through community development
plans in supported areas (baseline:
900,000 in 2012)

Engagement Area: Coverage and Quality of Health Services
Increase
access and
utilization of
quality health
services.

A very large remaining burden of
infectious diseases including
malaria, HIV, pneumonia, diarrhea,
and polio.
Low quality of care and poor client
orientation that results, inter alia, in
high maternal mortality ratios.

12. Improved coverage and
quality of health service
delivery

Lending:
Ongoing:

Nigeria State Health Investment
Outcome indicator:
Program, HIV/AIDS 2, Malaria
The share of child deliveries that are Booster Project, Polio Eradication
assisted by trained health personnel Support Project.
in 3 states increases to 43 % by
55

Country
Development
Goals

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
Little focus on results, inadequate
incentives, and lack of
accountability among health
workers and managers.
Inequitable access to and coverage
of health services.

2017 (baseline: 33% in 2013;
delivered by the results-based
financing of health services in 3
states)
The share of children 12-23 months
old who are fully immunized in 3
states increases to 45.4% by 2017
(baseline: 25.4% in 2013; delivered
by the results-based financing of
health services in 3 states)

New: P4R Health Operation
IFC Advisory

Ongoing:
 NHIS financial, regulatory;
 IT & business improvement project
(NHIS FRIMP)
 Healthcare PPPs at state level
Pipeline
 P4R health operation
 African health markets for equity
% of under-5 children sleeping
(AHME) supported demand side
under insecticide treated net the
financing schemes: supporting at
night preceding the survey increased
least 2 states with Community
from 44.6 % in 2010 to 60%.
Based Health Insurance Schemes;

TA to the Nigeria FMoH &
At least 80 % coverage with oral
selected regulatory agencies
polio vaccine sustained in every
(MDCN, PCN & Nursing and
state.
Midwifery council);
% of pregnant women living with
 TA to the Nigeria FMoH on the
HIV who receive a complete course
New National Health Bill
of antiretroviral prophylaxis to
reduce the risk of mother to child
transmission increased from 18% to
40%

Engagement Area: Efficiency, Equitable Access and Quality of Education Services
Increased
access to and

Primary school enrolment,
performance and reading outcomes

13. Improved learning
environment and management
56

Lending:

Country
Development
Goals
delivery of
quality
education
services

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
are low.

capacity for education

Incentives for new students to
engage in learning are often low
given the weak environment for
learning in schools.

Outcome indicator:
10,000 additional teachers in rural
areas (baseline: 31,243 in 2013,
delivered by the results-based
Weak management at the central and financing of education services in 3
school levels, inadequate number of states)
qualified teachers, weak curriculum 50% of supported schools
and shortage of core textbooks have demonstrate improvements in
hampered the quality of education.
learning outcomes (baseline: 4000
Low responsiveness of the education schools in 2013, delivered by the
results-based financing of education
system to firm level demand for
services in 3 states)
technical skills constraints
opportunities for growth and
competitiveness in the private
sector.

14. Strengthened responsiveness
of public and private training
institutions to skills demand

Ongoing:
State Education Program Investment
Project; SEEFOR, Fadama 3, GEM
New: GPE Education Project, Lagos
Eko Additional Financing; Africa
Centers of Excellence Regional
Project,
AAA
Political Economy of Education
Reforms; Public Expenditures in
Education and Training ; Skills for
Growth and Competitiveness Policy
Note; Jobs Assessment

Outcome Indicator:
Increased # of states with approved
Strategic Plan for improving quality
and relevance of TVE (Baseline 4 in
2013; Target 15 by 2017).
Engagement Area: Coverage and Efficiency of Water Supply Services
Increase
access to
improved
water

Nigeria is off- track in reaching its
water and sanitation MDGs. The
chronic lack of reliable sector
performance data makes it difficult

15. Improved coverage and
efficiency of water supply
service in selected states
Outcome indicators:
57

Lending:
Ongoing:
Urban Water Projects 1 and 2

Country
Development
Goals
resources and
improve the
sustainability
of water
delivery
services.

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
to accurately track progress.
Water supply services, where
accessible, are still unreliable and
often characterized by poor quality
of services. Services are often
unsustainable and many water
supply systems experienced
extensive deterioration and poor
utilization of existing capacities due
to under-maintenance, inadequate
capital investment, and power
supply, among other factors.

# of people with access to improved
water supply increased by 4 million
(baseline: 9.2 million in 2013,
target: 13.2 million in 2017).

New: Urban Water Project 3

Cost recovery for operation and
maintenance increased in average
by 45 percent in supported states by
2017 (baseline: Lagos 55% in 2012;
Cross River 66% in 2012; Kaduna
65% in 2012; Ogun 56% in 2012;
Enugu 65% in 2012).

Foundational/Cross Cutting Cluster: Governance and Public Sector Management
Improve
public sector
management.

Weak processes and systems for
public expenditure management,
weak procurement practices, limited
transparency, oversight and
management capacity in the public
sector.

16. Enhanced transparency on
budget execution in targeted
states and at Federal level

Lending:

Ongoing: SEEFOR, Public Sector
Governance Reform and Development
Project, Lagos DPO 1; EDO Growth
Outcome Indicators:
# states and the Federal Government and Employment Operation
with an integrated fully functioning New: Lagos DPO 2, ERGP2
financial information system
producing and publishing
consolidated quarterly financial
statements within 14 days of end of
each fiscal quarter (Baseline: 0 in
2012; target: federal Government
and 8 supported states in 2017).
# of states that have adopted
58

Country
Development
Goals

Overarching Goal: Socially and Regionally Inclusive Economic Growth
CPS Outcomes and Indicators
Development Challenges
Bank and Partner Program
addressed by CPS
procurement law increased from 24
in 2013 to 30 in 2017.
% of public procurement contracts
above threshold awarded through
open competition in 12 states
increased from 30 % in 2013 to 75%
in 2017.
Statistics and data measurement and
tracking capacity inadequate to
underpin informed policies and
decision making.

17. Improved quality and
accessibility of statistics
Outcome indicator:

Lending:
Ongoing: Statistics for Results Facility
(SRF) Grant

Increased availability of official statistics New: ERGP2
to all users at federal and state level as
measured by 40 percent increase in the
number of states with State Statistical
Yearbook which is less than 3 years old
(Baseline: 14 States, 2013).
40 percent increase in the number of
statistical thematic areas where
internationally agreed concepts and
standards are applied at federal and state
level (Baseline: 7 areas, 2013).

59

ANNEX 2: NIGERIA - SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND
MANAGEMENT (AS OF MARCH 10, 2014)
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2011

2012

2013

2014

28
4.0
10.7
13.6
17.9
23.8
15.8

24
3.4
12.5
11.5
12.5
11.5
20.4

27
3.5
25.9
28.0
25.9
28.0
19.4

25
3.8
32.0
32.5
44.0
40.8
12.7

Since FY 80
102
7,804.9

Last Five FYs
13
1,741.4

50.0
45.6

23.1
21.8

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

60

ANNEX 3: NIGERIA – OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA-GRANTS) (AS OF MARCH 10, 2014)

61

ANNEX 4: STATEMENT OF IFC’S COMMITTED AND DISBURSED
OUTSTANDING INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO AS OF FEB 28, 2014
(US$millions)

62

ANNEX 5: STRENGTHENING STATISTICS IN NIGERIA - A
SUGGESTED PATH FORWARD
1.
The long-term goal of Nigeria’s national statistical system is to evolve into a system
that delivers timely, reliable and relevant information about the demographic, social,
economic and environmental conditions of the country to citizens, businesses, Governments,
institutions and other interested parties. To be useful, such information must not only be
regularly available and credible; it must also be consistent. In particular, Nigeria’s determination
to implement the Transformation Agenda and, beyond and achieve the goal of Vision 20:2020
would be aided substantially by adequately planned and implemented statistical information,
which the National Statistical System (NSS) has to provide on a sustained fashion.
2.
Following a long period of decline, the capacity of the National Statistical System is
being rebuilt to enable it to discharge its core functions, and progress has been made in
several areas. With support from Statistical projects including the Trust Fund for Statistical
Capacity Building, the Statistics for Results Facility (SRF) and the LSMS-ISA, as well as other
Bank and donor (UN, EU, DFID, AfDB, and USAID) projects with statistical sub-components,
the national and sub-national statistical systems have been strengthened, with noticeable
improvements in data collection, processing, management and dissemination as well as in the
legal and institutional framework, in staff professionalism, and, to a lesser extent, in the
coordination of the NSS.
3.
Results include passage of the Statistics Act at Federal level in 2007 and Statistics Edict in
21 states of the Federation; the preparation and implementation of the National Strategy for the
Development of Statistics (NSDS) 2010-2014 at Federal level, and 23 State Statistical Master
Plans at state level; the revamping of statistical dissemination tools (websites, yearbooks) at
federal and state levels; the publication of backlogged statistical products such as state statistical
yearbooks and sector statistics reports; and deployment of a release calendar. Better coordination
of the system, at both vertical and horizontal levels, and better donor coordination for enhanced
aid effectiveness for statistical development in Nigeria, was also promoted by SRF.
4.
In 2011, the Government prepared the 2012-2014 Corporate Strategic
Implementation Plan (CSIP) to operationalize the NSDS and provide an overarching
framework for the development and ownership of statistics in Nigeria. The CSIP provides a
mechanism for a comprehensive reform of the NSS as an integrated, unified data production
system. It brings together all agencies involved in data production across the three tiers of
Government and engages all major statistical stakeholders as well as policy makers. The NSDS
and CSIP are a major attempt to modernize the institutional framework for the production, use,
and dissemination of statistics in Nigeria including better coordination of the statistical system,
both horizontally and vertically.
5.
Notwithstanding the recent progress, important constraints hinder the production,
quality and dissemination of data, which need to be addressed so that the NSS can effectively
play its role in supporting the formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
development policies at the national and subnational levels.
6.
First, strategic planning and implementation for statistics needs to be improved. The
results obtained to date in the implementation of the NSDS have been rather limited. Despite an
implementation plan, the strategy was too broad in scope and over ambitious, paid little
63

consideration for available resources, lacked a clear advocacy strategy, and a credible financing
plan. Ideally, the implementation of the NSDS required that the Government ensure a sustainable
and predictable flow of budgetary resources for statistical development independently of political
interests. This has not been consistently the case, although the Government made an effort during
2012 to raise the capital budget of NBS. Moreover, no monitoring and evaluation system was set
up to regularly assess implementation of the NSDS.
7.
Second, organization of data production and dissemination needs more coherence
and accountability. Critical core sector statistics, macro-economic and poverty data remain
relatively scarce, old and of uncertain quality. For example, while a cursory look at Nigeria
surveys systems indicate a large volume of data being produced (see Table 1), household and
economic surveys are conducted sporadically, depending on the availability of donor funding;
and, when conducted, results are not rapidly disseminated. Moreover, the metadata, the
information about the methods used to produce the data, is insufficient to ensure transparency
about the quality of the data. This has created over time a vicious cycle where the limited
availability and uncertain quality of official statistics has led to a low demand for data by policy
makers at all levels. In turn, the underfunding of the NSS by the Government is impeding
improvements in the quality of data produced by the NSS. To many users of Nigerian statistics,
data availability and quality are still lagging behind.
8.
Third, financial and technical support for the NSS between the Government and
development partners as well as among development partners has not been well
coordinated. In the past few years, as development partners stepped up their engagement, the
Government drastically reduced the capital budget for statistical production. While the recurrent
budget more than doubled in 2011 to reach US$24 million compared with the US$11 million
provided yearly during 2006-2010capital budget for NBS declined steadily during the same
period, from close to US$4 million in 2008 to barely US$1 million in 2011. This has made the
statistical system highly dependent on donor funding for its development and this is not
sustainable. As a result, realizing that the current model of financial support for statistical
development has major deficiencies, development partners are becoming increasingly reluctant
to maintain their support for statistics. Consequently, Nigerian statistics are under threat; and
some of the most important new instruments introduced in recent years (for example, the GHSpanel survey for monitoring household behavior and welfare) risk being discontinued due to lack
of resources.
9.
Fourth, Nigeria is a three-tiered Federation, and this adds a layer of complexity to the
functioning of the national statistical system. Nigerian statistics – demographic, social and
economic – are produced by multiple actors at the Federal and state level, which means that
effective coordination is essential for the production of harmonized data. At the Federal level, the
apex organization, since the passing of the Statistics Act in 2007, is NBS. Other important
players include the National Population Commission (NPopC), which has formal responsibility
for population and demographic statistics, including carrying out the population and housing
census; and the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), responsible for financial and monetary statistics.
The Departments of Planning, Research and Statistics of the Ministries, Departments and
Agencies (MDAs) are responsible, under the methodological guidance of NBS, for the
compilation and dissemination of statistics in their areas of competence. In general, the statistical
units in the MDAs are not properly set up, are under-resourced, and have very limited capacity to
undertake the required data production and dissemination activities. There is a similar statistical
64

structure at state level. However, for each state, in addition to the state-level replication of the
Federal level structure, there is either a State Statistical Agency (SSA) or a State Bureau of
Statistics (SBS), depending on the legal structure. All this leads to a poorly functioning statistical
system competing for the same scarce resources.
10. In response to the recent increased demand for credible statistics on Nigeria, the
Government has requested the WB’s assistance to strengthen the implementation of the
NSDS. This provides the opportunity for a bold and effective transformational approach,
including a comprehensive review of the production of Nigeria core statistics and stronger
coordination of donor support, to place the NSS on the path to world-class statistics provider.
11. The main beneficiaries of the planned support are the users and producers of
statistics on Nigeria. These include: (I) NBS; ii) NPopC; iii) SSAs and SBSs, (iv) MDAs; (v)
policy makers and planners; (vi) Parliament; (vii) non-state actors (viii) the private sector; and
(viii) researchers. The Bank and other development partners’ support have a better chance of
success if it focuses on four core areas:
 Strategy built on core products: The main objective will be to support the NSS to define a
brand, of core economic and social statistics products, with a clear roles and
responsibilities, defined time table of production, and dissemination plans.
 Support to the Strategy of Financing Statistics, possibly through innovative financing
models such as P4R or results buy-down. Since frequently inadequate, unpredictable and
donor-dependent financing is a major contributor to dysfunctional data production
systems, it is crucial that the financing model aligns incentives for better results.
 Technical support to production and dissemination of statistics produced through (a)better
documentation of methodologies; (b) alignment of national methodologies with
international standards and concepts; (c) professionalization of staff in NBS and other
statistical agencies in Nigeria to ensure sustained implementation of methodologies; (d)
improved coordination between the different components of the NSS for enhanced
statistical production and dissemination.
 Strong Partnerships. The Bank is strongly committed to the Partnership approach. The
Development Partners objective is to maximize the impact of Development Partners’
support in improving production and use of M&E and statistics in Nigeria. The group’s
priority work plan for the period 2012-14 emphasizes support for initiatives that will have
as priority outcome the enhancement of the quality of core statistics including national
accounts, health and education, at the federal and sub-national levels.

65

Table 1: Inventory of Nigeria Micro-Surveys
Surveys
General Household Surveys (GHS)

Year
2006 - 2011

2013
2010, 2012
2004, 2010

GHS Panel
Harmonized Nigeria Living Standard
Measurement (HNLSS)
Nigeria Youth Survey
Labor Force and Job Creation Survey
Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey

2012
2013
1999, 2007,
2011
2011
2010
2013
2011, 2012
2003, 2008
2005-2006
200109
2006, 2007
2006
2006
2006

National Agricultural Sample Survey
National Adult Disability Survey
MDG Survey
Nutrition Survey
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS)
Lagos Household Survey
National Literacy Survey
National Agricultural Census Pilot Survey
National Core Welfare Indicators Survey
African Peer Review Mechanism Survey
National Water Supply and Sanitation
Baseline Survey
Socio-economic Survey, Crop-Private
Farmers
National Survey of Agricultural Export
Commodities
Child Labor Survey
Baseline survey on micro-finance institutions
Food Security Survey
Commercial Agriculture Development
Program Survey
Export Commodity Survey
National Sugar household consumption
survey
Global Adult Tobacco Survey
State GDP Survey

Remarks
The 2010 had 22,000
households, of which 5,000
became part of panel. The 2011
is part of panel
Expected
2014 Expected
Ongoing

For 8 States in the North

Private farmers, not completed

2005
2003 - 2007
2000
2009
2010
2010
2010
2010
2012
2013

66

For 7 pilot states, ongoing

ANNEX 6: GOVERNANCE APPROACH
1.
In order to scale up reform initiatives and support Nigeria in accelerating poverty
reduction, the Bank will mainstream a governance approach across the portfolio. Based on
the Bank’s recent review of the portfolio through a governance lens, it is clear that the Bank can
identify and support pockets of capability, as well as promote socially inclusive coalitions for
reform that can reduce the potential for conflict and accompany Nigeria on a path of long term
institution building. Under the past CPS, the Bank fostered a number of reform dialogues
through a proactive use of its knowledge role with decision makers and state governors, as well
as other stakeholders. The recent client survey underlines the need for the Bank to do more of
this. A number of sector teams also used their relationships and knowledge to support reform
minded teams, including in the energy, health and agriculture sector. The Bank will continue to
mainstream its use of political economy and governance tools to further mainstream the potential
to scale up success across the portfolio. State level DPLs have proved effective in supporting
reform minded leadership, as well as setting in place good governance building blocks. The Bank
will continue to seek state level interaction through its portfolio and will pursue the opportunity
to increase competition around performance through a state level performance index. Finally, the
Bank will roll out the recently designed Governance, Conflict and Gender filter across the
portfolio, staring in FY14, and the recently constituted Governance Consultative Group will
continue to provide real time advice on local contexts to management and task teams.
2.
Against this background, the objective of the Governance Approach for the Nigeria
WB country team is to improve the development effectiveness of WB operations and take
steps to enhance the enabling environment for good governance in the country. Knowledge
products and policy dialogue will be used to improve the understanding of governance and
political economy constraints to development. This understanding will guide the Bank’s
engagement (including in particular lending/credit operations). A two-pronged strategy seeks to
make incremental gains through the Bank’s portfolio in the short to medium-term, while using
demand for good governance entry points and a more proactive convening and communication
role to improve the overall environment in the long term. This approach allows the Bank to build
on its recent global move to incorporate upstream governance analysis around projects, learn
from and scale-up its cross-sectoral approach to good governance, apply a more systematic and
predictable governance lens to the preparation of all products, and promote greater transparency
and issues-based debates in the country.55
3.
The Governance Approach sets out a number of analyses and processes to strengthen
the potential that projects contribute to concrete outcomes. This will be done through:
 An improved understanding of “macro level” political economy issue: through 1) an
enhanced literature review of governance and political economy in Nigeria, 2) a review
and assessment of the Banks previous use of political economy analysis and governance
engagement including DFGG, and 3) an analysis of the drives of successful and nonsuccessful reforms in the country.
 Support to task teams throughout the project cycle through a Governance, Gender
and Conflict Filter for all operations augmenting preparation of investment operations
55

The World Bank Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) Strategy and GAC Implementation strategy, World
Bank, 2012.

67

with political economy analysis where appropriate.
 Increased outreach, consultation and external guidance to the Bank in order to
enhance the flow of information on relevant development issues, while enabling the
Bank country team to update and evolve its thinking on relevant political economy
issues.
4.
At the time of the presentation of the CPS, the analytical work was at an advanced
stage of preparation and the findings have informed the strategy. An external Governance
Consultation Group has been established and met on several operations. The Filter has been
developed and piloted on two operations.
The Approach is illustrated in the figure below:

68

5.
The aim of the Filter is to support the country team in understanding key (formal and
informal) institutional arrangements and funding flows to improve their capacity to
achieve results throughout the project cycle. It also aims at helping the teams to assess the
political feasibility of suggested reforms to be supported in proposed projects, identify the level
of governance, conflict and gender risks that the project is likely to face and appropriate
mitigation measures and inform sector and country management decisions on new projects
taking into account the expected risks and possible mitigation measures.
The Filter will be implemented in a phased manner:
 As a first step, all new projects under preparation will be supported with a filter at an early
stage pre-PCN/PCN stage. These projects will also be monitored through the filter during
ISRs. The filter will be rolled out more comprehensively across the project and ESW
cycle, after the pilot is concluded.
 The filter will be open ended but will ask teams to submit a template prior to the PCN
review, addressing: (i) the fiduciary arrangements for the project including institutional
arrangements, funding flows and procurement capacity, (ii) conflict, gender and
institutional and governance lessons from previous operations, (iii) additional analysis of
3 areas: a) the political economy and reform environment, b) delivery incentives and
accountability lines for different levels of counterparts, c) possibilities for transparency
and engagement of demand side actors.
 This information will help task teams to prepare the ORAF at the Decision Meeting with
an opinion submitted to SD and whether risks are sufficiently identified and mitigated.
 The team will receive guidance NGAG will propose governance indicators that should be
monitored throughout project implementation.
 Teams that undertake additional analytical work will prepare governance annexes
summarizing the findings
 This pilot approach will be reviewed in December 2013, and findings from analytical
work, as well as pilot, incorporated.
6.
The proposed analytical work will inform the Filter which will be adjusted on an
ongoing basis as the understanding of the governance challenges improve. The Governance
Consultation Group is primarily a sounding board for the Country Management Unit Leadership
Team but will equally inform the evolving design of the filter. Project teams will therefore, as a
general rule, not approach the Consultation Group directly on project related issues.

69

ANNEX 7: FY10-13 JOINT COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
COMPLETION REPORT FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA
I.

Executive Summary

1.
This CPS Completion Report assesses the performance of the second joint Nigeria
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)56 for FY10-13, discussed by the Board of Executive
Directors on July 29, 2009. It describes the relevance, achievements and effectiveness of the
FY10-13 support and articulates lessons for developing the next Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS) for FY14-17. The CPS was prepared against the backdrop of two challenges facing
Nigeria: (a) the need to overcome the effects of the global economic crisis; and (b) the need to
sustain non-oil growth and develop human capital over the medium term. The core issue of
governance underpinned both challenges. At the end of the CPS period, Nigeria’s economy
continues to be vulnerable to oil price shocks, and faces three major challenges: (a) translating
growth into job opportunities, particularly for youth; (b) addressing increasing social and
regional disparities; and (c) addressing political challenges and reducing the security threat in the
North.
2.
The report assesses overall progress toward achieving CPS outcomes as moderately
satisfactory, and WB performance as moderately satisfactory. The CPS program achieved
sixteen (16) of the twenty-five (25) planned outcomes. Activities under the non-oil growth pillar
supported transformational reforms, particularly in the agriculture and energy sectors, where
technical support and policy dialogue helped generate broad consensus on and momentum for
the reform agenda. The governance pillar, a core aspect of the program, also demonstrated
remarkable achievement towards expected outcomes. Progress under the sustainable human
development pillar was slower, but laid the foundation for results-based activities during the next
CPS period. On WB performance, the clear alignment of the CPS design with the Government’s
priorities; the WB’s effectiveness in adapting to changing country conditions and unanticipated
risks; its strength in leveraging partnerships; and its intensive program delivery structure and
well-organized portfolio implementation support were strong achievements. However,
implementation challenges with two projects contributed to the moderately satisfactory
performance rating.
3.
Important lessons were learned during the implementation period: First, a deeper
understanding of the political economy and needs of various levels of Government is needed to
function effectively in Nigeria’s complex governance setting. This will be a critical element in
deepening the Bank’s engagement with a strategic set of stakeholders during the next assistance
period. Second, improving selectivity and simplifying project design will enhance
implementation progress and make it easier to achieve expected outcomes. Finally, a finer
balance and synergy of reform efforts between the Federal and State levels is needed to enhance
development outcomes.

56

The strategy was prepared with the UK Department for International Development (DFID), United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), and the African Development Bank (AfDB).

70

II.

Progress toward Development Outcomes

4.
During the CPS period, Nigeria made progress in three key areas aligned with its
development goals: (a) macroeconomic management, toward the goals of improving
Government performance and achieving sustainable and broad-based growth; (b) structural
reforms, to improve critical infrastructure, the investment climate, and food security; and (c)
security in the Niger Delta, which both the Government and the partners considered necessary
for the success of the program, although other unanticipated security threats arose during the
CPS period.
Macroeconomic management
5.
Nigeria experienced stable economic growth averaging over 7 percent over the CPS
period. 57 The Government used part of its US$22 billion in fiscal reserves (Excess Crude
Account, ECA) to offset the sharp decline in oil revenues during the 2008-2009 global crisis
which helped to maintain economic growth from 6 percent in 2008 to 7 percent in 2009.
However, despite the recovery in oil prices in 2010, Nigeria expanded its fiscal stimulus which
kept growth at 7.9 percent, but nearly exhausted the fiscal reserve while keeping the balance of
payments in deficit and inflation in double digits. Efforts to rein in excessive fiscal expansion
started in 2011. Despite the upheaval of January 2012,58 the Government managed to reduce the
weight of oil subsidy payments which along with other real spending cuts contributed to the
general Government budget deficit falling from 5.7 percent in 2010 to 1.9 percent in 2012.
6.
Macroeconomic risks remain significant, but the short and medium term outlook is
generally positive. The pace of GDP growth is expected to pick up somewhat in 2013; the
inflation rate, in double digits in recent years, fell from 12 percent in 2012 to 9 percent in 2013
and should continue to decline. The balance of payments should remain strong, at least in the
short term.59 The risk of an oil price shock is still high, given that the ECA balance is now about
US$4.88 billion. An unexpected decline in crude oil output has tightened the budgetary situation
and increased the medium-term balance of payments risk. In addition, the fiscal burden of the
subsidy60 is still significant and could become unsustainable as Nigeria faces the prospect of
diminishing oil revenues relative to GDP. Investments in the oil sector that could have ensured
strong medium-term growth in the sector have been delayed pending the passage of the
Petroleum Industry Bill, which the National Assembly has been debating for a number of years.
7.
Although oil receipts account for 90 percent of Nigeria’s export revenue and 75
percent of its budget revenue, real GDP growth is mostly supported by the non-oil sector,
and non-oil GDP will remain the main engine of growth. Since early 2000, expansion of the
service sector has been at the fore-front of Nigeria’s economic diversification. Public investment
and a growing middle class should continue to support rapid growth in the coming years. To help
strengthen the underlying structure of the Nigerian economy, the Government started increasing
the relative share of capital spending in the budget within the CPS period. In the longer term, this
57

National Bureau of Statistics, GDP Report 4th Quarter and Full Year 2012.
Public reaction to removal of fuel subsidy.
59
The balance of payments has mostly been in surplus since the fourth quarter of 2011, allowing authorities to increase gross
monetary foreign reserves from US$32 billion in September 2011 to US$48 billion in May 2013.
60
The fuel subsidy accounted for 4.6 percent and 2.5 percent of GDP in 2011 and 2012, respectively. Although the Government’s
bid in January 2011 to entirely eliminate the fuel subsidy resulted in civil unrest and a national strike, a compromise solution was
eventually proposed with a lower increase of the enforced fixed naira price for petrol.
58

71

trend should sustain considerable capital expenditure growth. Transport infrastructure
development and power supply projects will be the main areas of attention and will boost
Government expenditure, investments and jobs over the coming decade. However, Nigeria will
have to overcome economic and institutional challenges, such as infrastructure bottlenecks and a
weak climate for doing business, in order to promote more inclusive economic growth and
employment and sustain improvements in the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Social Outcomes
8.
However, growth has not been inclusive and has not triggered significant poverty
reduction. The poverty headcount in Nigeria declined marginally from 48.4 percent in 20032004 to 46 percent in 2009-2010.61 Considering the high population growth rate, the number of
Nigerians living in poverty has increased from 60 to 75 million within 5 years. While poverty
seems to have declined faster in the coastal south and around the Federal Capital Abuja, the
North-East appears to have experienced a significant increase in poverty. Furthermore,
unemployment has shown little improvement. In fact, formal unemployment grew from 19.7 to
23.9 percent between 2009 and 2011; and youth unemployment (ages 15-24) rose from 25 to
37.7 percent,62 with a concomitant increase in the risk of social unrest.
Structural reforms
9.
The banking system was strengthened and the stability of the financial system was
maintained in the face of the 2008-09 fiscal crisis. By 2012, the sector had been recapitalized
and governance had significantly improved. As of end-2011, gross financial system assets were
equivalent to 61 percent of GDP, with banks and pension funds comprising 79 and 12 percent,
respectively, of total system assets. However, further deepening of the sector through access to
long-term financing is essential to unlock nascent markets. While bank lending is heavily
concentrated on the larger corporations and their supplier value chains, longer-term finance is
largely absent from the sector, and this gap is significantly hampering Nigeria’s economic
growth potential.
10. The country made significant progress toward major structural reforms. In the power
sector, the Government made substantial progress on the implementation of a Presidential
Roadmap to Power Sector Reform and a Gas Master Plan. These initiatives established a
commercial framework for domestic gas-to-power sales; allowed for the privatization or private
management of generation, transmission and distribution utilities; and established a costreflective tariff. Secondly, agriculture has been identified as a key engine of growth under the
new Agriculture Transformation Agenda (ATA), initiated by the new Government elected in
2011 which desires more focus on agriculture to ensure food security and more equitable growth.
First steps include reorganization of the fertilizer and seed sectors, the improvement of market
institutions, and efforts to set up processing zones to attract the private sector.
Political and security challenges
11. The CPS period was marked by political changes and security challenges. The CPS
saw Nigeria’s third consecutive civil president in the 2011 general elections, which were
considered historically one of the fairest but were also highly contested in the North, where the
61
62

Using adult equivalent methodology.
National Bureau of Statistics, Socio Economic Survey: Unemployment 2011 Report.

72

post-election upheaval claimed hundreds of lives. Security became a growing concern in many
parts of the country, exacerbated by North-South religious and ethnic tensions. While the
Government’s successful amnesty program for combatants in the Niger Delta Region led to a
drastic reduction in attacks on oil pipelines and kidnappings of foreign oil workers, the
unexpected rise in bombings in the North, abductions and organized crime in the South-East, and
sporadic but vicious communal conflict in the Middle Belt exacerbated challenges for the
Government. Most recently, the Government declared a state of emergency in three Northern
states to curtail the violence and insurgency acts of Boko Haram.
III. CPS Program Performance
12. The evaluation of program performance, summarized in Annex 1, is based on the outcomes
and indicators in the CPS Progress Report (CPSPR), which reflects the revisions to the CPS
program requested by the new Government elected in 2011. The CPSPR annexes 3-1 to 3-10
present detailed subprogram reviews and assessments for each of the sectors and main areas of
engagement. Overall, program performance is assessed to be moderately satisfactory: the
program achieved good progress toward most major expected outcomes, and no major
shortcomings were identified. Significant progress was achieved under all three pillars, and
outcomes were quite solid for 16 of the 25 indicators. Overall, the results for Pillar 1 and Pillar 2
were partially achieved, and results for Pillar 3 were achieved.
C.1 Pillar 1: Achieving Sustainable and Inclusive Non-Oil Growth
13. Substantial results were realized in power generation capacity and transmission efficiency,
road network conditions, environmental and climate change management, and in the financial
system. Of these outcomes, three (power generation, transmission efficiency and road network
conditions) were key elements that addressed infrastructure deficits and have a cross-cutting
impact on all other aspects of non-oil growth. Majority of business owners in Nigeria consider
poor supply of electricity the biggest challenge to doing business63 and the poor condition of
roads is one of the factors that discourages foreign investors.64 These outcomes also rose from a
substantially low base to attain the planned targets, demonstrating that substantial investments in
these areas, if channeled right, has potential for achieving strong results. The achievements in the
environment and financial system outcomes also had significant effects on enhancing capacity
and establishing a policy base in key institutions, where formerly none existed.
14. Expected outcomes in public transportation, urban water supply, PPPs and agricultural
productivity were partially achieved, though targets were close to being met, with very minor
shortcomings. The non-achievement of planned improvement in business environment was
mainly due to the late start off of the GEM project and a shortcoming in the design of the
indicator which covered the entire country whereas the Bank only focused on selected states.
Increased access to critical physical infrastructure
15. Putting the power reform back on track: The program’s leveraging of private sector
financing for power generation and distribution reduced the need for public spending in the
sector, enabling more public funds to be directed to other Vision 20:2020 priorities. The Bank’s
63 ICA
64

2011.
Nigeria Country Report Infrastructure, Africa Infrastructure Series, WB, 2011.

73

investment and technical support for the power sector reform contributed to the following
notable achievements:
 Development of a commercial framework for domestic gas-to-power sales, supported by
partial risk guarantees (PRGs) totaling US$400 million for the Nigeria Electricity and
Gas Improvement Project (NEGIP), which helped to significantly increase gas-based
generation capacity;
 Implementation in June 2012 of a cost-reflective multi-year tariff order (MYTO2), which
was instrumental in attracting private investment for the privatization of state generation
and distribution utilities, which reached its final stages in early 2013;
 Effectiveness of a three-year contract with Manitoba Hydro International (MHI) for
management of the Transmission Company of Nigeria (TCN); and
 Launch of an Energy Business Plan (EBP) developed jointly by IDA/IBRD, IFC and
MIGA to help mobilize private investment in new generation capacity totaling 1,500
MW, for the benefit of independent power producers (IPPs).
16. Improved road network conditions: Support to the transport sector resulted in an
increase in the number of rural and federal roads rehabilitated to good or fair condition, as well
as improved road safety. The introduction of output and performance-based approaches for road
rehabilitation and maintenance took time to materialize,65 and is now being implemented on a
smaller scale than originally envisaged by the authorities. Progress on road sector governance
has been slower than anticipated, as a draft legal framework for management of the federal
highway system is still being debated.
17. Improved public transport services in Lagos state: The remarkable improvement in
public transport management capacity in Lagos state is attributable to the Bank’s sustained
technical assistance to the Lagos Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (LAMATA).
Established under the first Lagos Urban Transport Project and strengthened under the follow-on
project, LAMATA was recently selected by the World Bank Institute’s (WBI’s) Knowledge Hub
Community of Practice (CoP) to participate in peer-to-peer learning with other transport agencies
that are also functioning as regional hubs.
Sustainable agriculture development and market access
18. Improved agricultural productivity: In the agriculture sector, the community-driven
development (CDD) approach increased the productivity and income of beneficiary farmers in
every state, providing a model that could potentially be scaled up by Government. The spatial
analysis conducted by the Bank will be a tool for aligning infrastructure investment with
agriculture programs, with a view to improving rural access and regional connectivity and
stimulating product diversification and job creation. When the new Government defined its
Agriculture Transformation Agenda (ATA), which aims to position agriculture as an engine of
growth, the Bank responded by adding an Agricultural Development Policy Operation (DPO) to
the CPS program to support policy reforms aimed at improving farmers’ access to improved
technologies, inputs, and markets.
19. Improved environmental and climate change management: The capacity for
environmental management has improved at all levels. WBG supported development of two key
65

Due to the need for more preparation to address contractual risk sharing, financing, and the overall readiness of contractors and
government agencies to implement these innovative approaches

74

elements of an early warning system for coastal disaster risk management, and helped to
strengthen environmental planning at the community level. The Bank also worked with the EC,
DFID, UN and other partners to conduct a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) after the
devastating floods of 2012; and this PDNA is now providing the framework for long-term
reconstruction and resilience efforts. Finally, the Bank team’s climate risk analysis provided
adaptation options for the country’s agriculture, water resource, and energy sectors. The report’s
recommendations are already being applied in the agriculture sector.
Improved investment climate and financial system
20. Improved business environment: Expected improvements in the business environment
were not fully realized: the Medium, Small and Micro Enterprise (MSME) project aimed at
providing entrepreneurs in three states (Abia, Lagos and Kaduna) with increased access to
financial services; and the DFID-funded, Bank-executed Investment Climate Project (ICP) aimed
at reducing selected investment climate barriers that constrained firm performance in four states
(Lagos, Kaduna, Kano, and Cross River). Targets were only partially achieved, with only two of
the four ICP states (Kano and Cross River) having improved the ease of starting a business, and
only two of the three MSME states (Kaduna and Lagos) having improved contract
enforcement.66 Ministerial commitment to federal-level reforms has now been secured, and the
WB and DFID are providing technical support to the Federal Doing Business and
Competitiveness Council, established following a high-level workshop on business climate
reform in January 2012.
21. Maintaining confidence and stability in the financial system: Overall, assistance to the
Government and Central Bank achieved its objectives of maintaining confidence and stability in
the financial system, and strengthening the banking system. Support to help manage the recovery
from the global crisis began with a DPO in 2009 aimed at strengthening regulation and
supervision in the banking sector. Bank restructuring began in the second half of 2009 and was
consolidated during the CPS period; and since 2011, Nigeria’s financial system has been stable
and the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of banks has remained above 15 percent. By the end of the
CPS period, the Nigerian banking sector was recapitalized, and the incentives and
responsibilities of commercial banks significantly improved. In 2012, the Bank and IMF
prepared a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) which focused on winding down the
bank restructuring agency, the Assets Management Company of Nigeria (AMCON) and
reforming the framework for development finance. At the request of the Government, the Bank
and IMF also prepared an Infrastructure Finance Note exploring options for involving domestic
financial institutions in infrastructure public-private partnerships (PPPs). This Note and the
FSAP will form the basis for Bank Group support to the financial sector under the next CPS.
22. Increased number of public-private partnerships: Efforts to increase PPP were only
partially successful. The Privatization Project under the first CPS had helped to move the
Government toward adoption of a National Policy on PPP under the 2010-2013 CPS. A PPP
operation approved in March 2011 aimed at encouraging private investment in Nigeria’s core
infrastructure sectors; however, the operation faced some implementation challenges, including
the preference of a number of new ministers for a public investment scheme, leading to a dearth
of bankable projects, as initially envisioned. On the other hand, the Bank’s efforts to help
66

Sub-National Doing Business Study, 2008 and 2010 (World Bank and IFC). A new sub-national Doing Business study is
currently underway that will assess progress from 2010 to 2013.

75

establish PPPs in the power sector, by mobilizing PRGs and preparing model business plans,
helped to boost the confidence of private investors and mobilize financing for privatization.
C.2 Pillar 2: Human Development
23. The Bank achieved significant results in improving health sector development; community
development and social protection and; in post-basic education outcomes. Conversely,
achievements were modest in improving access to malaria health care services and in enhancing
the quality of basic education. Merging the demand side activities with the supply aspects and
the technical capacity of the implementing agencies in the malaria program at state level
contributed to the considerable short-fall in implementation outcomes. The quality of basic
education was impacted by the low achievements in the transition rates and the math and literacy
scores of grade 4 students in the states that participated in SESP.
24. The Bank took a system-strengthening approach to improving access, quality, and
equity in health and education. Interventions specifically targeted improvements in quality and
access to maternal and child health services, quality of basic education, and access to post-basic
education; as well as the utilization of services by the extreme poor and vulnerable. Results in
the areas of health and education were partially achieved; and outcomes under the equitable
utilization of human development services were achieved.
Improved health care services
25. Health sector development: A review of the Health System Fund Project and the Second
Health System Development Project (HSPD 2) found that (a) large-scale, input-based approaches
rarely translate into improvements in health services; (b) failure to consistently address key
governance issues such as accountability, incentives, and management impede progress even
when inputs are available; and (c) lack of attention to monitoring and evaluation is a critical
barrier to success. In response to these lessons, the new Government developed the Saving One
Million Lives (SOML) initiative, which takes a strategic approach to implementing high- impact,
evidence-based, cost-effective public health interventions, building on the performance-based
financing approach piloted under the ongoing Nigeria State Health Investment Project (NSHIP).
26. The HSDP 2 supported the Ministry of Health in producing a policy document on
PPPs in health care delivery. The new Government is also working to attract private
investments to the sector and several states are now using the innovative models proposed in the
policy document to structure health care investments, with IFC support.
27. The CPS contributed significantly to progress in polio eradication. As of June 14,
2013, 28 states have been polio free for one year, and coverage of oral polio vaccine (OPV) in
Northern endemic states increased from 44 to 90 percent during the project period (spanning
CPS 1 and 2). 67 The intensive vaccination efforts, strengthening of the disease surveillance
system, rigorous monitoring, and regular reviews of progress, which depended on collaboration
among Government, the World Health Organization (WHO), and faith and community-based
organizations, were instrumental in achieving the CPS targets.

67

The buy-down arrangement of the Bank’s Polio Project enabled the financing and delivery of OPV without delays for the
period.

76

28. The Bank has made the response to HIV/AIDS more effective and evidence-based.
Bank interventions 68 helped to stabilize the HIV epidemic by: (a) strengthening prevention
efforts aimed at the most at-risk persons, such as commercial sex workers; (b) carrying out an
epidemiological analysis to identify states with the highest HIV prevalence rates; (c) increasing
access to critical HIV-related services such as prevention of mother to child transmission
(PMTCT); and (d) strengthening the institutions responsible for coordinating programs at
national and state levels.69
Improved quality of basic and post-basic education
29. As in the health sector, lessons in the education sector are driving the Bank’s
transition from the financing of inputs to the achievement of outcomes. The positive
experience and lessons from the devolution of decision-making and financial resources to the
school level through School Development Grants supported by the State Education Sector
Project (SESP) laid the groundwork for introducing two performance and results-based
operations: The Lagos Eko Project, which featured competitive funding and performance
incentives; and the State Education Programmatic Investment Program (SEPIP), approved last
year for implementation during the next CPS period, which will make disbursements to three
states contingent on their achievement of indicators for increased teacher effectiveness, increased
school-level effectiveness and management accountability, and international learning
benchmarks.
30. Nigeria’s competitiveness has been constrained by limited opportunities for postbasic education and training, particularly in science and technology. The CPS supported
Government efforts to expand access to post-basic education, primarily through the Lagos Eko
Project and the Science and Technology Education Post-Basic (STEP-B), which, like Eko,
featured competitive funding and performance incentives. The outcomes were quite compelling:
senior secondary school students’ grades in Lagos state surpassed expectations, and the
proportion of students obtaining grade B and above in science and technology was more than
double the CPS target. There are also ongoing efforts focused on skills development and
improvement; and an ongoing analytical study of skills development for the new economy will
be completed during the next CPS period.
Equitable utilization of HD services
31. The Bank’s aid to human development (HD) increased the equitable utilization of HD
services by the extreme poor and vulnerable in rural communities, and access to social and
natural resource infrastructure services in 27 states (see Annex 1). The achievements exceeded
the target by 600 percent, and produced far-reaching benefits in terms of school enrollment of
poor children, access to improved water sources, and access to health care. Beneficiaries of the
Community and Social Development Project (CSDP) were selected through a demand-driven,
participatory and transparent process that ensured inclusion of the poorest communities. The
project generated increased participation and transparency at the community level, and
strengthened community organization processes. Participating local community groups and local
68

The Government received US$225 million under the Second HIV/AIDS Program Development Project (HPDP 2), in addition
to the US$150 million provided under HPDP 1 (2002-2012).
69
The Bank facilitated the transition of the National and State Action Committees for AIDS (NACAs and SACAs) to official
AIDS control agencies, which have their own budget lines and serve as channels for donor AIDS prevention and control
resources.

77

and state authorities have now started to commit their own resources to community-level
planning. The challenge during the next CPS will be to empower local Governments to support
more community-led development.
C.3 Pillar 3: Governance for Results
32. The majority of the outcomes under pillar 3 were achieved especially considering the
strengthening of PFM systems, improved integrity in payroll and personnel control mechanisms
in the civil service and the effectiveness of anti-corruption institutions. These advances were the
resultant effects of the technical assistance and financial aid provided by the Bank.
Notwithstanding, escalating governance results and scaling up reforms continue to be a challenge
because of Nigeria’s complex demographic, geographic and political context. For this reason, the
new CPS proposes to approach governance as a cross-cutting theme through system-wide
improvements in PFM, technical assistance to improve the selectivity of public investments and
by improving quality and access to data for decision making.
33. Most CPS indicators were met and notable results were achieved under this pillar.
The Bank continued interventions aimed at improving public financial management (PFM)
institutions and systems at the Federal level, and deepened engagement at state level. Key
achievements included strengthening the legislative framework for PFM; introducing automated
treasury systems at the Federal level and in some states; and a comprehensive policy dialogue on
PFM which led to two DPOs in Lagos and Edo states. The Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) study, in particular, laid the groundwork for deepening the Bank’s
engagement in PFM during the next CPS period. In addition, activities to strengthen social
accountability were piloted, and will be scaled up under the next CPS.
34. At the Federal level, the Economic Reform and Governance Project (ERGP)
facilitated improvements in budget planning, implementation, reporting and auditing. The
project introduced a Government Integrated Financial Management Information System
(GIFMIS) connecting the central bank and more than 200 Government agencies; strengthened
the Treasury Single Account (TSA); introduced medium-term sector strategies; and improved
accounting procedures. The Bank also facilitated a gap analysis of the consistency of
Government financial reporting with international standards, resulting in the federal and state
Governments transitioning to International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS)compliant financial reporting.
35. The Bank’s longstanding engagement in procurement reform continued under the
CPS, with a focus on modernizing the legal framework. As a result, large federal public
contracts awarded through open competition increased from 30 to 100 percent,70 and the open
publication of a greater number of federal and state contract awards increased citizens’ access to
public procurement information and enhanced accountability and transparency. In addition, the
number of agencies with third-party monitoring of procurement increased from 0 in 2010 at the
federal and state levels to 28 at the federal and 12 at the state level, respectively. A recently
established electronic procurement portal by a coalition of civil society organizations (CSOs) has
further strengthened accountability. These improved practices reduced waste in public
expenditure at the Federal level by about US$3.7 billion over the CPS period.71
70
71

BPP Summary of Contract Awards against 2012 Capital Allocation Budget.
Ibid.

78

36. The Bank’s state-level engagement helped a number of state Governments to lay out
a comprehensive framework for PFM. By the end of the CPS period, public expenditure
management and financial accountability reviews (PEMFARs) had been concluded in more than
20 states; programmatic integrated fiduciary assessments (PIFAs) had been carried out in six
states; DPOs were on track to be completed in two states; and four states had successfully
implemented PFM reforms. The state-level review processes and the credit-funded operations
have laid the groundwork for a significant scaling up of the governance agenda during the next
assistance period, when various TA operations supported by the Bank and EC will expand the
PFM-anchored governance agenda to 21 states.
37. State-level engagement also resulted in the passage of procurement laws in 24 states; the
establishment of regulatory agencies in 18 states and of public procurement professional cadres
in 10 states; preparation of standard bidding documents in three states; and the introduction of a
procurement planning tool to improve the efficiency of capital budget implementation at the
Federal level. As a result, public contracts above thresholds awarded through open competition
increased from 25 to 40 percent.72
38. The Bank’s support for development of the country’s statistical systems has advanced
the availability of critical data at the national and sub-national levels. There were noticeable
improvements in the collection, processing, management and dissemination of data; in the legal
and institutional framework for management of statistics; and in staff professionalism. However,
critical sector statistics and macroeconomic and poverty data remain limited and of questionable
quality and will continue to be improved during the next CPS period.
39. The Bank tested a number of accountability tools to make the use of public funds
more transparent. These efforts included: (a) Open Government initiatives at the federal and
state levels; (b) CSO-led monitoring of social services provision; and (c) beneficiaries’ rights and
entitlements campaigns, including under the NSHIP. ICT-based feedback and redress
mechanisms were also tested in selected areas under NSHIP and Fadama III, with beneficiaries
using mobile phones and web-based technologies to comment on access to service delivery,
satisfaction, and complaints. These tools were also used in a teacher absenteeism pilot in the
SEPIP and Edo DPO projects; and for web-based mapping and monitoring of urban violence in
Benin City.
IV.

WORLD BANK PERFORMANCE

40. The WB’s performance in the 2010-2013 CPS is rated moderately satisfactory. The
Bank’s flexible response to the new Government’s priorities made it possible to achieve most
CPS outcomes, including revised outcomes; and established the basis for an expanded
partnership during the upcoming CPS period. The CPS program was well aligned with the
country’s challenges and Government development priorities. It was anchored in the
Government’s Vision 20:2020 and its Seven Point Agenda, and focused on four sets of
challenges: (a) offsetting the fiscal impact of the global financial crisis and maintaining the
momentum of reform; (b) enhancing the competitiveness of the country in order to expand nonoil growth; (c) building on advances made in health and education service delivery and social
assistance, to improve human development outcomes; and (d) improving public sector
72

Data sources: Programmatic Integrated Fiduciary Assessments (PIFAs) in Edo, Rivers and Lagos States and State Governance
and Capacity Building Project (SGCBP) ICR in Cross River and Bauchi (2011)

79

governance and PFM efficiency at the federal and state levels. The new Government reaffirmed
these priorities and also introduced a Transformation Agenda and a National Implementation
Plan (NIP) centred on improving macroeconomic stability, governance, human development,
infrastructure, agricultural productivity, and the power sector.
A. Design
41. The 2010-2013 CPS improved on the design of the earlier CPS in several important
ways. First, the choice of available lending instruments was significantly expanded. While
the first CPS offered only investment operations, the second CPS also included DPOs to help the
Government cope with the global financial crisis; and (after the 2011 election) to support states
in improving their fiscal and budgetary management.73 It also included partial risk guarantees
to encourage private sector investment in the energy sector.
42. The method for selecting target states was also significantly improved. Whereas the
earlier CPS concentrated resources in a few high-performing states, the selection of states under
the 2010-13 CPS was based on their needs, existing programs, state-level governance capability
and commitment, and zonal/geopolitical balance. Lending instruments were also tailored to the
conditions of each state. The CPS expanded the Bank’s engagement at the state level, thus
enhancing its impact on MDG-related activities, for which the states are responsible (see section
III on CPS performance). IDA financing was used mostly to help increase impacts in areas where
the participation of CPS partners was not deep. As the same time, more effective supervision and
increased selectivity in operations resulted in improved outcomes. Going forward, to achieve
some minimum institutional capacity and standards, the Bank will have to balance this approach
with the need to ensure that regional disparities are reduced.
43. The WB responded flexibly to Government’s adjusted needs at mid-term review and
after the 2011 elections. During the mid-term review, a new irrigation project was added; while
a number of planned projects were scaled up (e.g. erosion and watershed management and youth
employment). A proposed Malaria II project was dropped, although additional financing for the
first malaria project was approved. In addition, as the CPS put greater emphasis on evidencebased and performance-based approaches, two performance-based loans in education and health
replaced the traditional investment loans earlier envisaged for health, maternal and child health
and nutrition, and state education. In response to the 2011 new Government’s adjusted priorities,
namely agriculture, long-term financing and energy, the WB provided significant resources to
finance the ATA through a DPO and two investment operations (one of which will be delivered
under the new CPS) and funded a housing finance project to be delivered in Q1-FY14. Finally,
an additional financing for NEGIP was approved, and a power sector guarantee project was
added to the pipeline for the next CPS period.
44. Leveraging partnerships: The partnership arrangement under the CPS began with four
partners – DFID, AfDB, USAID and the WB; but eventually expanded to include the EC and
AFD after 2011. Currently, the Bank is engaged in co-financing arrangements with the EC on
governance and with AFD on water and transport projects. The Bank also maintains a strong
73

Although the Bank upheld the plan to utilize state DPOs (SDPOs) in strongly reforming states, and Lagos state successfully
pioneered the SDPO as planned, it was only able to access the first tranche during the CPS period. The second tranche, scheduled
for FY12, was stalled because of resistance from some newly elected executive and legislative officials. However, given the
results achieved, the second Lagos DPO was finally authorized and is expected to be delivered in FY14.

80

partnership with DFID on governance and statistics. DFID has also seconded staff to the Bank to
support project supervision in the health and Finance and Private Sector Development (FPD)
sectors. The broadening scope of engagement has led the development partners to establish a
comprehensive Country Assistance Framework (CAF) for the next assistance period. Under the
CAF, development partners will agree on modalities to intensify engagement and measure
impacts in critical areas. Such collaboration is already apparent in Nigeria’s newly launched
African Health Markets for Equity (AHME) program, jointly funded by DFID and the Gates
Foundation.
45. The WB conducted a gender review of the IDA portfolio and building on the Gender
World Development Report, organized an evidenced-based gender dialogue with DFID covering
all the geo-political zones, in recognition of the inadequate emphasis on gender in the portfolio.
These two activities helped design an approach which will be fully integrated in the new CPS.
46. The CPS was deemed to have met the principle of flexibility and responsiveness in
responding to Nigeria’s changing environment and needs. However, the 2012 Country
Opinion Survey 74 carried out as part of stocktaking for the CPS indicated that the Bank’s
processes, procedures, and instruments will have to be more adaptable, context-specific and
responsive going forward to respond to Nigeria’s rapidly changing circumstances.
B. Implementation
Lending and non-lending support
47. The indicative amount from IDA over the FY10-13 period was US$5.5 billion,
compared to actual commitments of US$5.2 billion, or US$350 million less than planned.75
The IDA portfolio (26 projects) and GEF (4 projects) were well aligned with the Government
strategy, including the new Government’s Agricultural Transformation Agenda (ATA). The
portfolio focused primarily on non-oil growth (57 percent), human development (33 percent),
and state-level governance (10 percent).
48. The delays in the approval of the 2012 Borrowing Plan prevented the timely signing
of agreements related to investments of US$1.57 billion, of which US$160 million was from
IDA 15. With the recent adoption of the Borrowing Plan and signing of long-pending
agreements, the WB teams and the client (federal and state) are now working hard to compensate
for the delays and accelerating implementation of new projects.
49. The Bank produced a variety of sector work at the country and state level, which
formed the basis for policy discussions. The Bank prepared studies on fuel subsidies and the
fiscal management of oil wealth, highlighting major challenges and opportunities. Two other
important pieces of analytical work, on enhancing resilience to climate change (which was the
basis for erosion and watershed project and agriculture DPO), and on opportunities for low
carbon development, were discussed during a workshop in December 2012 with technical
stakeholders, and afterward during high-level consultations. In Human Development, the Bank
produced critical work on the quality of primary education, skill gaps, and the status of social
protection in Nigeria. In addition, the Bank’s poverty profile of Nigeria, developed in 2013 in
74

December 2012.
As of May 2013, the World Bank Group’s active commitments in Nigeria include US$5.3 billion from IDA, US$1.1 billion
from IFC, and US$98 million from MIGA.

75

81

collaboration with the National Bureau of Statistics, will be the foundation for a more detailed
poverty assessment to be used in the next CPS program. A study was completed on making fiscal
federalism work for economic development; it will be followed by a deeper study on spatial
economic development. The Bank also carried out a Debt Management Performance Assessment
(DeMPA), undertaken within the broader framework of the Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability Assessment, which could be the basis for a programmatic approach, with other
CAF partners, to strengthen debt management capacity.
50. Partnership and South-South collaboration: The Bank has actively facilitated SouthSouth collaboration and knowledge exchange to inform development activities in Nigeria. Field
visits to Brazil, India and other African countries on safety nets programs informed the Youth
Employment and Social Safety Net Operation (YESSO); peer learning events helped to
strengthen project impact evaluations; the Finance and Private Sector Development Department
supported the Government’s SME cluster development program through South-South
collaboration with China; and the visit of the Fadama 3 project team to India, Singapore and Sri
Lanka prompted the creation of federations of economic interest groups, a revolving funds
scheme, and a mobile-based agricultural advisory services pilot. Likewise, in the education
sector, the Lagos Eko project management team and participants from Ekiti state used a study
tour to Chile as an opportunity to strengthen partnership, collaboration, and cooperation among
higher education institutions in both countries. The Bank and IFC also facilitated a trip to the
Lesotho National Referral Hospital to give Nigerian officials a first-hand look at the use of PPPs
in healthcare investments.
51. The Bank used other innovative tools to improve service delivery. Most notable was
the development of impact evaluation (IE) which was used as tool to drive operational
effectiveness. The current country IE portfolio includes 19 ongoing and planned IEs in 7 sectors
and cuts across the three CPS2 pillars.76 The majority of IE activities are concentrated in human
development and in health in particular, where the Bank is supporting the Saving One Million
Lives (SOML) Initiative with a dedicated IE program in addition to conducting IEs on IDAfinanced investments. Financial literacy and financial inclusion is another area of focus,
including an IE of the YouWin business grant program. Additionally, in NEWMAP, YESSO, and
the SOML IEs, the IE design process is helping to plan for more efficient and timely delivery
and; in Commercial Agriculture Development Project, Malaria Control Booster Project, State
Health Program Investment Credit, IE evidence is being used to inform program management.
Portfolio management and performance
52. As of end June 2013, the Nigerian portfolio (World Bank) reached an historic high of
US$5.3 billion, consisting of 26 national operations (US$5.1 billion), 3 regional operations
(US$226.7 million); and 4 GEF operations (US$26.2 million). The current disbursement ratio of
the Nigeria portfolio is 18.3 percent (US$530.2 million disbursed in FY13), and the FY12
disbursement ratio was 16.4 percent. Seven projects 77 are currently classified as problem
76

Increasingly, the trend is towards “2nd generation” IEs, which examine variations in design of specific interventions to
understand which variant is most effective in achieving intended results, reflecting a shift towards the proactive creation of
evidence and knowledge.
77
Lagos Metropolitan Development and Governance Project (LMDGP), Growth and Employment (GEM), Public Private
Partnership project (PPP), Edo Growth and Employment Operation (Edo DPO), Public Sector Governance Development Project
(PSGDP), and Nigeria Erosion and Watershed Management project (NEWMAP) and Rural Access and Mobility Project 2
(RAMP 2).

82

projects (unsatisfactory or moderately unsatisfactory). The signing of new Financing
Agreements for three and the restructuring of two are expected to improve the performance of
these projects.
53. The delays in effectiveness of some projects contributed to lags in their
implementation and disbursement. The average disbursement lag in the Nigeria portfolio is 13
months. Most delays were associated with changes in Government procedures which resulted in
the lengthy intervals between Board approvals and effectiveness of projects. In the case of the
Borrowing Plan, the delay in approval resulted in eight projects being flagged for delayed
effectiveness. In spite of this, the share of commitments at risk was lower in FY13 (21.9 percent)
than in FY10 (46 percent), and the disbursement rate for FY13 was 19.5 percent, a significant
achievement
54. At mid-term review, both the Bank and the new Government realized that strong
efforts were needed to accelerate portfolio implementation. The Bank and senior officials
from the Ministry of Finance collaborated on standardizing procedures to process new
operations. Procurement clinics were organized for 332 project staff from 150 project
implementation units, and special workshops were held for slow-disbursing projects.
Additionally, M&E training was provided to key staff in the Ministry’s International Economic
Relations Department (IERD), with support from the Bank’s Institutional Development Fund
(IDF). In addition, to strengthen the portfolio over the second half of the CPS period: (a) the
Country Director constituted a multi-sector task team to conduct intensive assessments of key
operational areas and offer solutions; (b) the Country Management Unit (CMU) prepared
monthly Portfolio Monitoring Reports to identify projects requiring closer attention; (c) a CMU
leadership team, consisting of the CMU core team and sector leaders, met monthly to deliberate
on project, governance, and political economy issues that had the potential to impact the Country
Program; (d) the Country Director met periodically with Project Coordinators and Task Team
Leaders; (e) hands-on clinics and Country Program Performance Reviews (CPPRs) were carried
out to resolve operational challenges.
55. Despite these efforts, two projects presented particular challenges. Implementation of
the malaria project was threatened with the detection of fiduciary weaknesses, confirmed by
integrity vice presidency (INT) investigation. However, the Bank team reacted in a way which
was considered as best practice. A follow-up in-depth review by the Bank’s FM team led to the
introduction of corrective measures and a turnaround of the project after a disbursement lag of
six to eight months. The LMDG project, aimed at slum upgrading in Lagos, faced technical and
safeguards issues leading to an underperformance. While efforts were made to address them, it
was agreed to close the project and draw lessons for future operations.
56. Civil society organizations (CSOs) and community-based organizations are now
formally participating in new projects and providing formal feedback on the progress of
ongoing projects,78 after a stocktaking of social accountability mechanisms in Bank projects
showed that communities’ informal inputs were not being properly documented or taken into
account in decision-making. Several pilots involving CSOs in project implementation and
feedback gathering are now being assessed, with a view to scaling up their engagement in project
implementation and monitoring during the next CPS period.

78

Edo Growth and Employment Operation (Edo DPO), State Employment and Expenditure for Results project (SEEFOR)

83

C. Management of Risks
57. Some important risks were identified during CPS preparation. The impact of the
global financial crisis on the Nigerian economy could not be determined at the start of the CPS
period, but the Bank anticipated that policy reforms could be threatened. The Bank also
understood the risks of the turmoil in the Niger Delta and possible disruptions related to the 2011
elections. The Bank planned to alleviate these risks by ensuring that the program had
comprehensive support and by cultivating relationships with strong champions at both the federal
and state who could be expected to maintain a steady pace of reform.
58. While such efforts mitigated those particular risks, the Bank’s program was actually
more strongly impacted by one unanticipated risk – increasing insecurity in other parts of
the country. The risk of deadly attacks constrained project supervision in the North-Eastern
states of Borno, Yobe, Adamawa, and Gombe during the last year of the CPS, although some
supervision was carried out by implementing partners on the ground. The Bank’s Corporate
Security Office has been collaborating with the UN and other partners to continually analyze
and report on security risks and put mitigation measures in place for the next CPS period.
The team in Nigeria is also learning from Bank teams in countries such as Pakistan to adjust
its supervision response.
V.

LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS

59. Stocktaking activities and assessment of the results of the 2010-2013 CPS confirm
meaningful progress on the governance agenda and policy reforms, as well as on the use of
CDD approaches to drive growth and sustainable change in rural areas. However, the following
lessons will be essential in shaping the CPS for 2014-2017.
60. Widespread governance challenges remain a binding constraint to Nigeria’s
development, in spite of the significant gains in the CPS period. Nigeria shares the
complicated political economy of other resource-rich countries, and the size, ethnic diversity,
cycles of violent conflict and evolving democratic institutions make development a challenging
affair. In a shared response to these challenges, the WB has kept its engagement narrowly
focused on public financial management while other CPS partners have concentrated on
strengthening democratic institutions and the judiciary. However the Bank has also understood
the need to better understand and reflect the political economy of the country in sector
operations. Progress is most notable when such reforms are accompanied by intense policy
dialogue, technical assistance, and multi-stakeholder involvement, although the challenges to
achieving good governance through PFM reforms remain substantial. Also, preliminary pilots in
water and health projects towards the end of the CPS period demonstrate that a better
understanding of the political economy, financing, and institutional setup for operations could
potentially improve project performance and development impact.
61. A number of projects were found to be too complex or overly ambitious, which
slowed implementation and ultimately impacted the achievement of outcomes. An
implementation study commissioned by the WB 79 as part of a broader portfolio review
ascertained the need to improve the quality at entry of projects by: (a) keeping designs simple,
with a small number of implementing agencies; (b) establishing clear roles, responsibilities, and
accountabilities for the different implementing agencies, and ensuring each agency’s readiness
79

Nigeria Portfolio Implementation Arrangements Review, April 2013.

84

for implementation; and (c) setting clear project development objectives and indicators to allow
for unity of purpose. Improving the design of projects will also benefit from sound analytical
underpinnings and from a re-examination of the choice and mix of Bank Group instruments.
62. Facilitating the right balance and fostering synergies between federal and state-level
reforms will accelerate development. Nigeria’s governance and administration architecture has
multiple dimensions, and the needs of the federal and state Governments do not always align.
However, the structural reforms aimed at improving public sector management at both levels
have been relatively successful, and attest to the possibilities for harmonization. For instance,
monitoring and evaluation units have been established within the National Planning Commission
to monitor and evaluate federal Government activities, and these units and their functions are
being replicated at the state level. To facilitate the alignment of federal and state reforms during
the next assistance period, the Bank will prepare sector policy notes for state Governments, and
will strengthen the dialogue with state Governments on the use of DPOs. Moreover, the criteria
for selecting target states will need to be re-assessed to achieve an optimum balance between the
performance-based approach and the need to respond to lagging regions, particularly in the
North.
63. A final important lesson is that adequate stakeholder engagement is essential to
enhance results and outcomes. The country survey conducted in December 2012 revealed the
need to make better use of stakeholder engagement as a channel for collaborative dialogue to
achieve results. In response, the Bank is reorganizing its strategic outreach to Government at all
levels, and has initiated regular consultations with the Nigerian Governance Advisory Forum,
which includes opinion leaders from academia, think tanks, Government, civil society, and the
private sector. This will help the Bank team further understand the perspectives of different actors
and better adapt its programs to relevant priorities. Finally, the Bank team has started to deepen its
engagement with the National Assembly and will continue to do so along with other partners to
better explain its interventions and facilitate smoother approval of the Borrowing Plan.

85

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
[Rating: Partially Achieved

Status and Evaluation Summary

CAS Objective 1:Achieving Sustainable and Inclusive Non-Oil Growth
Increased access to critical physical infrastructure [rating: Achieved]
Power
Improved power generation capacity
Status: Achieved


Power supplied increased from
2800MW in 2009 to 4500MW in
2013



Multi Year Tariff Order (MYTO),
including corresponding feed-in
tariffs for generation plants,
revised.



The Nigerian Bulk Electricity
Trading (NBET) Company takes
effect as a “Single Buyer” to enter
into power purchase agreements
with Independent Power
Producers and manage the
contractual risks.



Action Plan and roadmap for
power sector reform with

The sector reform agenda was re-launched as
part of the current administration’s power
sector reform roadmap and led to Nigeria
setting a new all-time record in available
grid supply as of May 2013 with an available
supply of 4,500 MW while halving the
number of grid collapses compared to the
previous year (reduced from an average of
about 40 per annum to 18 during 2011).
The MYTO was revised in 2011. It took
effect on May 31, 2012 and will last for 5
years. MYTO is designed to provide financial
motivations for instantly needed incremental
investments in the industry and increase the
average Tariff from 8` Naira/kWh to cost
reflective levels (~ 21 Naira/kWh).

Lending:
 National Energy
Development Project
(NEDP) FY 05 -12;
 Nigeria Electricity and
Gas Improvement Project
(NEGIP) FY 09 -14.
Knowledge Activities
(ESW/AAA) and Technical
Assistance:
NG: Performance Contract for
Power Utilities in Nigeria;
GEF MSP- Nigeria: National
Energy Development Project;
NIGERIA: Support for Private
Development of the Nigerian
Power Sector.

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Improved coordination and deep
commitment from the current
administration led to some
tangible improvements in power
supply. It will be important to
strengthen the provision of
lifeline tariffs and ensure
adequate and timely investment
in the transmission subsector as
the Government and partners
sustain the efforts to complete
the privatization of the power
companies.

The NEBT, also known as the bulk trader,
was established in 2011. It was set up by the
National Electricity Sector Reforms Act of
2005 to fight recouping of investment by
distribution companies which was the single
biggest risk in the growth of the power sector.

The Roadmap for Power Sector Reform was
launched in August 2010. This roadmap is
critical for improving the gas-to-power

86

The Roadmap aims to
implement the National Electric

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators
indicative timelines for planned
actions.

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

Status and Evaluation Summary
infrastructure which will result in increased
electricity generation.

Improved power transmission efficiency

Status: Achieved



Transmission losses reduced from 13
percent in 2010 to 9.4 percent in 2012. These
include losses in transmission between sources
of supply and points of distribution and in the
distribution to consumers, including pilferage.

Transmission losses reduced from
13 percent in 2010 to 9 percent in
2013.

Power Policy (2001) and the
Electric Power Sector Reform
(EPSR) Act (2005), both
developed with support from the
WB. WB non-lending technical
advice has continued throughout
the launch and implementation
of the Roadmap, including
funding of the development of
the contract for the TCN
management, advice on the
PHCN privatization bidding
package, etc.
Lending:
 National Energy National
Energy Development
Project (NEDP) FY 05 12;
 Nigeria Electricity and
Gas Improvement Project
(NEGIP) FY 09 -14.
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
GEF MSP- Nigeria: National
Energy Development Project;
NIGERIA: Support for Private
Development of the Nigerian
Power Sector Infrastructure
program

Transport

87

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

Improved road network conditions

Status: Achieved



Additional 150 Km of selected
unity roads rehabilitated to fair
and good condition by 2013.
(Baseline: 99.8Km)

Additional 262 Km80 of selected unity roads
were rehabilitated to fair and good condition,
exceeding the target.



Additional 600 Km of selected
rural roads rehabilitated to fair
and good condition by 2013.
(Baseline: 0Km)

An additional 450.6981 Km of roads was
rehabilitated, compared to the target of
rehabilitating 600 Km of selected rural roads to
fair and good condition. The rehabilitation of
another 157Km of roads is underway and
expected to be completed by the end of 2013,
which will bring the total length of
rehabilitated roads to 607Km.

Improved Public Transport Services in
Lagos


Average bus speed on BRT
corridors increased from 10
Km/hr in 2009 to 20Km/hr in 2013

Proxy used: Total time saved in
motorized travels per day

80
81

Status: Partially Achieved
A decrease from 45 – 60 minutes in 2007 to
between 7 - 12 minutes per trip at the end of
2010 was reported in the total time saved in
motorized travels per day on selected legs of
the declared road network.
It was considered that several factors would
influence the increase in average bus speed on
BRT corridors and the total time saved in

FRDP only
Fadama, RAMP and CADP

88

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Lending:
 Rural Access and Mobility
Project (RAMP1) FY0814;
 Federal Roads
Development Project
(FRDP) FY09-16;
 Commercial Agriculture
Development Project
(CADP) FY09-14;
 Fadama 3 project FY0813.
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
PHRD: Nigeria-Federal Roads
Development Project;
NIGERIA: Fadama
Information and Knowledge
Services.
Lending:
 Lagos Urban Transport
Projects 1 & II (FY02-10;
FY10-15)

Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Lagos Urban Transport Project
2

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
The OPRC method of
contracting requires a long
procurement process. The delays
in rehabilitation of roads
occurred primarily because this
lengthy process was not factored
into the project design and
hence, the contracts for the
construction of rural roads using
OPRC concept started later than
expected.

Setting up a strong institutional
basis for coordinated planning
and regulation is critical to the
success of urban transport
projects. LUTP II will continue
to support the strengthening of
the capacity of LAMATA to
effectively deliver this service
and implement the Strategic
Transport Master Plan.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

motorized travels per day on selected legs of
the declared road network is considered a
better reflection of improved public transport
in Lagos.


Money spent by poor households
on bus travel per trip along
project corridor reduced from
N108/day in 2009 to N92/day in
2010



Single Agency coordinating urban
transport at the state and local
level in Lagos

Water
Improved Access to Urban Water Supply


Number of people with access to
improved water supply increased
from 5 million in 2009 to 12
million in 2013 in urban and periurban communities in targeted
States.

The money spent by poor households on bus
travel per trip along project corridor has
reduced from N108/day in 2009 to N96/day
in 2010.

Lagos Metropolitan Area Transport
Authority (LAMATA) was established by
law in 2010 and has continued to operate as a
single Agency coordinating urban transport at
the state and local level in Lagos.
Status: Partially achieved
As of March 2013, nearly 9.2 million people
living in urban and peri-urban communities in
Kaduna, Ogun, Enugu, Lagos and Cross River
states received up to 760 million litres of
improved water.

Lending:
 National Urban Water
Sector Reform 1 SIL
(FY04 - 13);
 National Urban Water
Sector Reform SIM 2
(FY05 - 16);
 Community Based Urban
Development Project
(CBUDP) FY02-11.
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
GPOBA W1: TA - OBA in
small towns and peri-urban
water supply schemes in
Nigeria; NG: Workshop on

89

An internal delegated
management system was
introduced. It has given more
autonomy to the districts in
Kaduna State, has raised morale
of staff and will strengthen
sustainability of the utilities.
This model should be
showcased and adapted in other
States.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Increased Public Private Partnerships
 National Policy on Public Private
Partnership approved



Inter-MDA Agreement reached
by 2013 on key legislative
amendments and new legislation
required to strengthen the
enabling environment for PPPs

Status and Evaluation Summary

Status: Partially Achieved
The National Policy on Public Private
Partnership was approved in August 2009.
The approval of the Policy was a result of
consistent dialogue and strengthened
engagement with Government prior to 2009.
Although the inter-MDA Agreement on key
legislative amendments and new legislation
required to strengthen the enabling
environment for PPPs is not yet in place,
efforts are underway to improve the legal and
regulatory framework governing FGN PPP
activity. The PPP facility is now available to
Ministries and Government Agencies who wish
to implement PPP projects under their
Ministries.

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Water Utility Reform in
Nigeria
Lending:
 Public Private Partnership
Project (FY11 – 17).
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Nigeria: Assessment of
Potential Water PPP Projects in
Nigeria; Nigeria: Support for
Private Development of the
Nigerian Power Sector;
Nigeria: Assessment of
Potential Water PPP Projects in
Nigeria; NG Investment
Climate Program & SPPIM;
PPIAF: Nigeria: ICRC
Institutional and Capacity
Building.

2. Sustainable agricultural development and market access [rating: Partially Achieved]
Agriculture
Improved Agricultural Productivity
Status: Partially achieved
Lending:
 Commercial Agriculture
Beneficiaries of CADP in Cross River,
Development Project
 Increased volume of sales of
Kaduna, Kano, Enugu and Lagos states
(CADP) FY09-14,
agricultural products in targeted
areas for selected crops from 2.1m succeeded in increasing the volume of sales,
 Fadama 2 & 3 (FY00-09;
indicated by an overall increase of 3.21 percent
MT in 2009 to 2.9m MT in 2013
FY09-13)
more than the targeted 20 percent over the
project baseline. 12,762.94mt from fresh fruit
Knowledge Activities and
bunch (ffb), pineapples, guava fruit, cocoa,
Technical Assistance:
maize, rice and processed fish (baseline:
NIGERIA: Fadama
2665.87mt). Additionally, project beneficiaries Information and Knowledge

90

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

The effective reform in the
energy sector was triggered by
political pragmatism, and
commitment to resolving the
intractable challenges in the
sector and instituting due
diligence for economic
advancement.
With this in view, the new CPS
will assist in strengthening
specific sectors that have
demonstrated commitment to
develop and implement viable
PPP projects.

The agricultural productivity
program was hinged on the
community driven approach
with strong community
involvement. That lesson from
past initiatives had demonstrated
good results. The new CPS
should deepen that lesson and
ensure that Government drives
the CDD strategy.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary
sold 8,392,000 juveniles (Baseline: 4,066,450)
and 6,694, 275 crates of eggs (Baseline: 68,000
crates).
Following the CPS PR, the contributing project
realized that the ‘million Metric Ton’ value
used is too high a target and erroneous. Since
the project targets were established differently,
the value has been adjusted to correspond to
the program contribution in this summary.



Increase in income from
agricultural produce in selected
communities per household per
year from N135000/hh/yr to
N189000/hh/yr

The progress from sales is gradually
influencing the income generated from
agricultural produce in selected communities
per household per year. A substantial increase
was achieved, from N135000/hh/yr to
N184241/hh/yr .82



National Agriculture Strategy
Adopted

The national agriculture strategy was adopted
in 2010, reflecting the positive efforts of the
reform agenda in the sector. The commitment
to this program was consolidated by the
subsequent launching of the Agricultural
Transformation Agenda (ATA) by the new
Agriculture Minister in 2011.

Environment
Improved Environmental and Climate
Change Management


82

Key features of an early warning
system for coastal disaster risk
assessment, planning, and

Status: Achieved
Three key features of an early warning system
for coastal disaster risk assessment, planning,
and management were defined. These are (a)

Fadama 3 data only

91

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Services; GEF FSP-Nigeria:
Second National Fadama
Development Critical
Ecosystem Management
Project; Nigeria: Agriculture
and Rural Information,
Knowledge and Business
Services; Strengthening
Agricultural Production
Systems and Facilitating
Access to Markets in Nigeria.

Lending:
 Nigeria Erosion and
Watershed Management
Project (NEWMAP)
(FY12-20);
 Local Empowerment and

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Given Nigeria’s predicted
population growth, it is vital to
ensure that economic growth is
built on clean technology, and
that new infrastructure will itself
not prove vulnerable to climate

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators
management defined by 2013

Status and Evaluation Summary
developing a disaster profile for Nigeria, (b)
building DRM capacity and (c) the framework
for the early warning system. The first two
have been fully developed.
The recently conducted Post Disaster Needs
Assessment (PDNA) will inform the
development of the framework for the early
warning system, which is the third expected
feature that is being developed.



Number of LGAs that are
supporting communities with
environmentally sustainable
development plans increased from
0 in 2009 to 200 in 2013



Watershed Management
Coordination Capacity established
in 6 targeted states.



Using the Community Driven Development
(CDD) approach, 279 LGAs have integrated
environmentally sustainable LDPs in their
annual workplan and budget (AWPB).
Environmentally sustainable micro-projects
include, for example, community woodlots,
bee-keeping, water production, and
agroforestry.

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Environmental
Management Project
(LEEMP) FY03-09;
 Fadama III GEF (FY0913)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance: GEF
FSP-Nigeria: Second National
Fadama Development Critical
Ecosystem Management
Project (06); Landscapes and
Livelihoods (Development of
Nigeria Erosion and Watershed
Project - NEWMAP);
Enhancing the Climate
Resilience of Growth in
Nigeria: Disaster Risk
Management PDNA (GFDRR:
Track III TA); Nigeria Scaling Up Sustainable Land
Management Practice,
Knowledge, and Coordination;
Nigeria Climate Change
Assessment.

At the Federal level, a National Environmental
Policy is in place. At the state level, watershed
management and coordination capacity has
been built in seven states (Abia, Anambra,
Cross River, Ebonyi, Edo, Enugu and Imo
States) and Geographic Information System
(GIS) for poverty and environmental
information management has been set up in the
7 states.
3. Improved Investment Climate and Financial System [rating: Partially Achieved]
Status: Partially Achieved.
Lending:
Policy making influenced by
 Growth and Employment
considerations on growth and
The Doing Business reviews and growth and
project (FY11-16)
employment, and trade
employment study have contributed to key
liberalization
policy decisions in Nigeria. The Annual Doing Knowledge Activities and

92

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
change.
To further understand climate
change dynamics in Nigeria, the
Climate Change Assessment
report will assess climate risks
and adaptation options in the
agriculture and water resource
sectors and provide a brief
description of the vulnerability
profile of Lagos state.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Improved Business Environment



83
84

Reduction in procedures, time and
cost involved in starting business
and enforcing contracts in 6
selected states by 20 percent.

Individuals that have access to

Status and Evaluation Summary
Business reports have enabled states to
examine impediments to growth more closely.
The Bank completed the Investment Climate
Assessments (ICAs), reviewed the experiences
of over 3000 surveyed business owners in 26
states about the aspects of the business climate
that affect their enterprises. The Bank also
provided policy advice through workshops
which led to Government establishing Ports,
Competitiveness and Business Councils
including reducing the number of agencies in
Ports from 17 to 7. Overall, 60 reforms were
identified and DFID is providing technical
support through GEM. Similar progress was
made under the land regulations. The challenge
that remains is translating the reforms into
results, because the business climate and trade
regime in Nigeria are quite restrictive.
Status: Not Achieved
The Bank’s support through the Medium,
Small and Micro Enterprise (MSME) project
aimed at enabling individuals in three targeted
states (Abia, Lagos and Kaduna) to increase
access to financial services and the GEM
project was to reduce selected investment
climate barriers that constrained MSME
performance. None of the states supported by
the Bank improved in starting a business.
However, Kaduna and Lagos states83 improved
in enforcing contracts.84
This indicator was not in the direct control of

Kaduna, Lagos and Sokoto
Sub-National Doing Business Study, 2008 and 2010.

93

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Technical Assistance: Putting
Nigeria to Work; Nigeria Trade
Facilitation Intervention; Trade
facilitation in Nigerian
Agricultural Markets; NGEmployment and Growth
Study; Nigeria Economic
Report 2013; SME Finance
Study; Employment and
Growth Study; Investment
Climate Study in 26 States.

Lending:
 Growth and Employment
(GEM) project (FY11-16);
 Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprise project
(MSME) FY03-11.
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Nigeria Consumer Finance;
NG Investment Climate
Program & SPPIM

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Unrealistic to expand this to
contribute to a country wide
increase.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators
financial services (savings, loans,
insurance, lease) increased as a
percent of the total adult
population

Maintained confidence and stability in
the financial system


Capital adequacy ratios remain

Status and Evaluation Summary
CPS activities because it covered the entire
country whereas the Bank only focused on
selected states. However, results of a study
conducted on a national scale indicate that
individuals that have access to financial
services (savings, loans, insurance, lease)
increased as a percent of the total adult
population. The study supported by DFID and
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation85 had the
following findings:
 The proportion of adults that are formally
included86 increased from 23.6% in 2008
to 43.0% in 2012, which is an increase of
17.4 million;
 The proportion of adults that are
financially served87 increased from 47.5%
to 60.3%, which is an increase of 11.7
million;
 The number of adults that are financially
excluded88 decreased by 10.5 million
Status: Achieved
Following the successful recapitalization of the

85

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Lending:
 Financial sector DPO
(FY10).

Impact of fast-tracked budget
support alleviated
macroeconomic crisis-impact
and successfully supported

Enhancing Financial Innovation and Access (EFInA) Access to Financial Services in Nigeria 2012 survey
“Financially included” refers to: (a) all adults who have access to or use a deposit money bank in addition to having/using a traditional banking product, including ATM card,
credit card, savings account, current account, fixed deposit account, mortgage, overdraft, loan from a bank, or Islamic banking product; including indirect access; and (b) all adults
who have access to or use other formal institutions and financial products not supplied by deposit money banks, including Insurance companies, microfinance banks, pension
schemes or shares. It also includes remittances (through formal channels); including indirect access.
87
“Financially served” includes the group of individuals described above in addition to all adults who do not have any banked or formal other products, but have access to or use
only informal services and products. This includes savings clubs/pools, esusu, ajo, or moneylenders; as well as remittances (through informal channels such as via a transport
service or recharge card)
88
“Financially excluded” refers to adults not in the banked, formal other or informal only categories, even though the person may be using or have access to any of the following:
loan/gift from friends or family and loan from employers, as well as remittances via a friend/family member
86

94

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
Lending and Non-Lending
Lessons and Suggestions for
Activities that Contributed to
the new CPS
the outcomes
specific reform actions and
rescued banks, the average Capital Adequacy Knowledge Activities and
above 15 percent
dialogue relating to authorities’
Technical Assistance:
Ratio (CAR) of all the banks operating in
Nigeria Consumer Finance;
bank restructuring initiatives.
Nigeria has risen significantly to 17.12
Nigeria: State Credit Rating
percent89 in 2013 from >15percent in 2011,
and Credit Advisory; Policy
Just-in-time, technical assistance
surpassing the CPS target.
Note on analysis of Credit
is associated with high level
Squeeze,
policy impact.
Nigeria Housing Finance
Financing Small and Medium
Scale Enterprises in Nigeria,
Financial Sector Assessment
Program Update,
Financing Options for
Infrastructure PPPs
CPS Objective 2: Sustained Improvement in Access to, Quality and Utilization of human Development Services
[Rating: Partially Achieved]
4. Improved access to, utilization, and quality of health care services [rating: Partially Achieved]
Heath Sector Development
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary



Status: Achieved.

National Health Bill passed by the
National Assembly

Improved vaccination coverage

The National Health Bill was passed by the
National Assembly in 2011 before the
general election. The bill was revised
substantially and resubmitted to the Assembly
and has just passed the third reading. The bill
aims at protecting and prioritizing the rights of
Nigerians, particularly the vulnerable and
disadvantaged, to get basic minimum package
of health care, among other objectives.
Status: Achieved.



Data shows that the proportion of under-2

89

Increased proportion of children
Central Bank of Nigeria Database 2013

95

Lending:
 Health Systems
Development Project 2
(FY02-12)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
NA

Lending:
Health Systems Development
Project 2 (FY02-12); Polio

This result was not in the direct
control of the project and its
achievement was hindered by
political factors. Awareness of
the political economy and early
engagement and participation of
the main stakeholders within
that knowledge context is
important in sectoral
interventions that involve
development of policies.
Recent intensive data-driven
performance management
efforts reversed the increasing

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators
under 2 years fully vaccinated
with OPV from 20 – 30 percent in
2009 to 40 – 50 percent in 2013



Proportion of children (12-23
months old) fully vaccinated
increased from 13 percent in 2009
to 71 percent in 2013.

Improved access to maternal health
services




Number of births attended by
skilled health personnel increased
in selected states from 0.8 million
in 2010 to 6 million in 2013.
Number of additional health
service providers trained in
Northern States increased from 0

Status and Evaluation Summary
years fully vaccinated with OPV (3 doses)
within the age bracket has increased. In 2010, a
value of 74.0 percent was reported on a
national scale (NICS 2010), exceeding the CPS
target. For campaign immunizations, the
OPV coverage of the endemic states
increased from 44% in 2003 (CDC) to 90%
in 2012 (PHSS).90
Data available from country surveys indicate
that this result was fully attained: Against the
baseline of 22.7 percent from the National
Demographic and Health Survey (NDHS
2008), the National Immunization Coverage
Survey showed an increase to 53% in 2010
(NICS 2010). World Development Indicators
(WDI) data showed an increase to 71
percent in 2011.
Status: Achieved.
In actual terms, the program contributed to
increasing the number of births attended by
skilled health personnel in selected states91
from 0.8 million in 2010 to 6,739,593 in
201192, over the CPS target of 6 million.
The Bank’s support to health delivery was

90

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Project (03 & 12)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
NG-Polio Eradication (FY03) –
TF; NG Third Grant for Polio
Eradication;

Lending:
Health Systems Development
Project 2 ((FY02-12)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Community Based Health and
Nutrition; Nigeria HRBF
Design - Bank-executed;
Nigeria - Health Systems Healthy Mothers and Health

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
trend of polio cases – As of May
8, only 15 cases has been found
compared to 38 cases in 2012
during the same period. Of the
15 cases, 10 cases are in security
compromised Borno and Yobe
states.

The health systems support
program provided Government
and the Bank with the basis to
improve the financing and
functioning of the health system.
Inputs are not necessarily the
issue but there must be an
adequate framework with
policies, strategic directives, and
priority plans for deploying
inputs and measuring results.

Public Heath Solutions Services (PHSS)
28 States were supported by HSDP2: Benue, Federal Capital Territory (FCT), Kogi, Kwara, Nasarawa, Niger, Plateau, Adamawa, Bauchi, Borno, Gombe, Taraba, Yobe, Jigawa,
Katsina, Kano, Kaduna, Kebbi, Sokoto, Zamfara, Abia, Anambra, Ebonyi, Enugu, Imo, Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Cross River, Delta, Edo, Rivers, Ekiti, Lagos, Ogun, Ondo, Osun and
Oyo.
92
Health Facility/HMIS data
91

96

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators
in 2009 to 2,700 in 2013.

HIV/AIDS
Improved access to HIV/AIDS health
care services


Percentage of women and men
aged 15-49 who received an HIV
test in the last 12 months and who
know their results increased from
10.8% of males and 10.4% of
females in 2009 to 20% in 2013.

Status and Evaluation Summary
responsible for the training of an additional
29,203 health service providers in Northern
States93 between 2009 and 2012.

Status: Achieved.
Available evidence demonstrates that the joint
collaboration of partners contributed to the
increase in the number of people aged 15 to 49
who received an HIV test in the last 12 months
and who know their results by 57 percent
between 2011 and 2012 (from 1.65 Million to
2.8 Million94; 1,512,810 females and
1,279,801 males).95

Malaria
Improved access to Malaria Health Care
services

Status: Partially Achieved.



The support from the Malaria Booster Control

Percentage of under-5 children

93

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Babies; Service Delivery
Quality Assessment and
Resource Tracking Study in
Nigeria.

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
Increased accountability with
the involvement of beneficiaries
and stakeholders was a key
component of successful
implementation. These lessons
have been a strong contributing
factor in the critical need for the
move to a results-based
approach in the new State
Health programmatic investment
lending.

Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Technical Assistance to
improve the Effectiveness and
Efficiency of HIV in Nigeria
Prevention Programs

The slow start up of the second
HIV/AIDS Program
Development project hindered
more substantial contributions
from Bank support. In the new
CPS period, the Bank team will
be supporting projects to
strengthen the quality of entry
and speed up implementation by
working with the Government to
fast-track legal and
administration processes.

Lending:
Malaria Booster Control
Project (07 & Additional
Financing).

Recent data is not yet available.
The next LQAS is being
conducted and results will be
ready in a few months.

Lending:
HIV/AIDS Programme
Development Project I (FY06 11) & HIV/AIDS Programme
Development Project II (FY09)

Selected states were Benue, Federal Capital Territory (FCT), Kogi, Kwara, Nasarawa, Niger, Plateau, Adamawa, Bauchi, Borno, Gombe, Taraba, Yobe, Jigawa, Katsina, Kano,
Kaduna, Kebbi, Sokoto and Zamfara.
94
Actual amount is 2,792,611
95
Nigeria Global AIDS Progress Report 2012

97

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators
sleeping under insecticide treated
nets increased in seven states96
from 3.6 percent in 2009 to 60
percent in 2013.



Percentage of under-5 children
with fever treated with an
effective anti-malarial within 24
hours from onset of symptoms
increased in seven states from 10
percent in 2009 to 60 percent in
2013.

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

Project contributed to the increase in the
percentage of children less than 5 that slept
under an ITN the preceding night to the survey:
50.2 percent97 (compared to 6 percent in 2006
and 3.6 percent in 2009) among a total
population of 8,348,611 children under 5. This
result is supported by a corresponding increase
in households that own at least insecticide
treated nets/long lasting insecticide treated nets
(ITN/LLIN) from 71.7 percent in 2011
compared to 2.6 percent in 2006.

Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Round 28 Nigeria Community
health systems strengthening
for malaria control in Anambra
and Akwa Ibom (Bank
Executed); NG-Malaria Impact
Evaluation Program (FY10)

The percentage of children less than 5 years
with fever treated with an effective antimalarial medicine within 24 hours from onset
of fever was 5.8 percent in 2010 from a
baseline of 1.7 percent (NDHS 2008; 1.5
percent MICS 2007; and 0 LQAS 2006).98
5. Improved access and inclusiveness to quality and relevant education at all levels [rating: Partially Achieved]
Basic Education
Improved quality of basic education
Lending:
Status: Partially Achieved.
State Education Sector Project
(SESP) – FY07-11.
The CPS target99 was achieved only in Kwara
 Transition rates from Primary
to Junior Secondary in targeted State for boys and girls. In Kaduna, transition for
girls increased while the rates in Kano remained
Knowledge Activities and
states
the same for girls and decreased for boys.
Technical Assistance:
Nigeria - Preparation For
States
Kwara
Kano
Kaduna
Country Education Status
Report); Nigeria - Education
96

Jigawa, Rivers, Gombe, Bauchi, Akwa Ibom, Anambra and Kano States
National Malaria Indicator Survey (NMIS) 2011
98
The baseline used in the CPS and CPS PR was calibrated from standard sources.
99
Kaduna: Girls 54.4 percent; Boys 64.9 percent, Kano: Girls 30 percent; Boys 54 percent, Kwara: Girls 38 percent; Boys 44 percent
97

98

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
Nonetheless, a comparison of
key PDO/IR performance
indicators of WB assisted states
with other states using the
recently conducted National
Malaria Indicator Survey (NMIS
- 2011) shows clearly that there
is wide positive disparity in
results documented from the
seven states compared with
other states. There were initial
teething challenges which
included synchronizing the
demand side activities with the
supply, and capacity challenges
at the state level.

Increasing the quality of basic
education in a grossly
disadvantaged setting will
require concerted and consistent
effort and resources. The CPS
period was not a realistic
timeframe in which improved
quality of education could have
been achieved in robust terms.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators



Average national math and
reading test scores of primary
4th grade students in targeted
states (percent)

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
(%)
Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls Boy Sector Policy Note; Nigeria:
s
Strengthening Sector
Actual
59
59
25
46
51.8
50.7 Governance and Promoting
Target
43
49
30
54
53.4
64.9 Partnership in Service
2011
Delivery; Nigeria - Girls'
Baseline 38
44
25
49
49.4
59.9
Education CCT Pilot – Kano;
2009
Nigeria - State Education
Sector Analysis.
The CPS target was exceeded for Math in Kaduna
and Kano, and in Kwara for reading and literacy
test scores.
Status and Evaluation Summary

States
(%)
Actual

Kwara
Math Lit
5.02
43.6

Kano
Math
10.15

Lit
8.0

Target
Baseline
2009

12.4
8.4

9.6
5.6

11.3
7.3

33.7
29.7

Kaduna
Math Lit
42.16 25.8
1
12.7
30.4
8.7
26.4

Post-Basic Education
Improved access to post-basic
education

Status: Achieved.



The proportion of senior secondary students in
public schools with pass grade in WASSCE
achieved the CPS target.



Percentage of public senior
secondary students with pass
grade in WASSCE
disaggregated by Math, English,
Science (Biology).

Increase in the number of
students obtaining grades B and
above in Science and
Technology disciplines in
federal Post Basic Institutions

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Lending:
Lagos EKO Project (FY09-13),
STEP B project (FY08-13)

Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Nigeria - Science and
Subjects
Biology
Math
Englis Technology Education in PostActual
65.20
47.27
84.48 Basic (STEP-B); Nigeria Target
28
25
26
Education Sector Policy Note;
2011
Nigeria: Strengthening Sector
Baseline 09
23
20
21
Governance and Promoting
Partnership in Service
The number of students obtaining grades B and
Delivery; Nigeria Global
above in Science and Technology disciplines in
Partnership for Education Fund
federal Post Basic Institutions also increased to
(GPEF).

99

Innovative competitive funding
and performance incentive can
work, given the appropriate
enabling environment (e.g.
Government ownership and
commitment, institutional
capacity, partnerships), as
demonstrated for S&T under
the STEP-B Project, and for
school level management and
accountability for results under
the Lagos Eko Project.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

56,552: 53 percent increase against target of 25
percent and a baseline of 36,953 in 2009. Forty
Four (44) percent of eligible students were
enrolled in senior secondary schools in 2010.
6. Equitable Utilization of Human Development Services [rating: Achieved]
Community Development and Social Protection
Equitable utilization of HD services
Status: Achieved.


Increased number of poor
households utilizing primary
health care, basic education and
rural water in targeted
communities in selected states100
increased from 50,000 households
in 2009 to 150,000 households in
2013.

The CPS target was well exceeded as 700,000
households (in 1,800 new communities) are now
benefiting from HD services. Also within the CPS
period, CSDP contributed to the following:
(i) No. of school age children enrolled in primary
schools in participating poor communities
increased from 265 to 16, 298 (male) and from
241 to 12, 748 (female); in secondary schools,
enrollment increased from 237 to 10,685
(male), and from 205 to 7, 759 (female);
(ii) Increase in proportion of community members
with easy access to improved water facilities
now 77 percent from less than 30 percent;
(iii) Reduction in average cost of water by about 62
percent nominal cost;

CPS Objective 3: GOVERNANCE FOR RESULTS [Rating: Achieved]
7. Improved effectiveness of anticorruption institutions [rating: Achieved]
Improved effectiveness of anticorruption Status: Achieved.
institutions
100

Lending:
Community and Social
Development Project
(FY09-13)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Poverty Monitoring; W1NIGERIA: Strengthening
Sector Governance and
Promoting Partnership in
Service Delivery; NG:
Social Safety Nets Develop
Dialogue.

Lending:
Economic Reform and

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

The major lesson in this CDD
approach is the ownership,
relevance and effectiveness of
the establishment of the microprojects and the utilization of
the services. The approach
ensures inclusiveness and
flexibility to tackle emerging
vulnerability.
The major challenge is the
partnership of the community
groups with local Government
authorities in terms of the
maintenance and sustainability
of the services from the
projects. Most local
Governments are not "stable".
There is also a high turnover of
political office holders, with
implications for the continuity
of the approach.

Improvement to Governance is
the key to equitable and

Selected states include Abia, Benue, Delta, Imo, Anambra, Adamawa, Kogi, Niger, Bauchi, Enugu, Kebbi, Cross River, Plateau, Yobe, Osun, Oyo and Rivers.

100

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators


Cumulative total amount proceeds
of corruption recovered increased
from US$5.9 Billion in 2009 to
US$7 Billion in 2013.



Bill on National Sovereign Wealth
Fund passed by the Senate by
2013



Nigeria
complies
with
the
Extractive
Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI)

Status and Evaluation Summary
Cumulative total amount proceeds of
corruption recovered increased to US$9.11
billion (2011), surpassing the CPS targets. The
Bank supported the Nigeria Anti-Corruption
Agency (EFCC) to strengthen its capacity to
recover misappropriated funds through the
Economic Reform and Governance Project
(ERGP).

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Governance Project (FY05-13)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
NG:
Extractive
Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI)
Management and Gas and Oil.

The NSWF bill was passed by the Senate in
2011 and Governors concurred in 2012. A
Sovereign Wealth Investment Agency was
formed and its Board and Management
constituted with a seed fund of $1 billion from
the Excess Crude Account (ECA).

Based on the WB support to Nigeria Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (NEITI) and
continuous engagement of USAID-supported
civil society partners, the Oil and Gas Revenue
audit for 2006 – 2008 was completed and the
report made available to the public by the
NEITI. Similar reports were completed for
1999 - 2004 and 2005. In addition, the NEITI
engaged a consulting firm to conduct Oil and
Gas Revenue audit for 2009 - 2011. Efforts
were also made by the NEITI to ensure the
implementation of the recommendations of
remediation actions on the audit reports. With
these actions, Nigeria became EITI compliant
in 2011.
8. Improved performance management system in the civil service [rating: Achieved]

101

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
sustainable development as well
as to stability and cohesion;
while at the same time being
very challenging.
For Nigeria to be up to date
with reporting and to sustain
these efforts, NEITI needs to
ensure that the results of the
reports are continuously
integrated into development
initiatives to trigger reforms.

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary
Status: Achieved.

No. of MDAs using new
performance-based management
system at Federal level increased
from 0 in 2009 to 6 in 2013.

The performance-based management system
was launched and has been initiated by the
Head of Service in October 2012 for 30
MDAs.101 All civil servants including the
Cabinet Ministers have to enter into
Performance Contracts which will be evaluated
annually.

Reduced discrepancy between
personnel records and payroll
records in database in 3 selected
states from 15 percent in 2009 to
less than 5 percent in 2013.

By end-2011, Cross River had reduced the
discrepancy to 3 percent, Kaduna to 0 percent
and Bauchi to 8 percent from a baseline of 2025 percent in 2009. This system is expected to
enhance savings on recurrent expenditure in the
states. For instance, estimated savings for
Kaduna State was USD 0.1 million per year.

Improved performance management
system in the civil service




Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes
Lending:
NG State Governance project I
(FY05-11), Federal DPC
(FY10), Lagos DPC (FY11) &
EDO Growth and Employment
Project (FY12)

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance: Sector
Dialogue; NG:
Promoting
Good Governance Niger Delta

9. Strengthened public financial management systems [rating: Achieved]
Improved auditing and accounting


Time for submission of Annual
Financial Statement of
Government by Office of the
Accountant General reduced at
Federal level and in selected states
from 6 – 9 months in 2010 to 3
months

Status: Achieved.
Time taken to submit Annual Financial
Statements of Government by the Office of the
Accountant General reduced at Federal level
and in selected states102 from 6 – 9 months in
2010 to 2 – 3 months (Federal and States)103
which is in line with the CPS target.

101

Lending:
NG State Governance project I
(FY05-11), Federal DPC
(FY10), Lagos DPC (FY11) &
EDO Growth and
Employment Project (FY12)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance: Sector

At the sub-national levels, which
accounts for about 50 percent of
national public expenditure,
realistic and objective budgeting
remains a challenge. It would be
essential to pursue interventions
that can strengthen Integrated
Financial Management
information Systems

Thirty Federal Ministries and their agencies are covered under the Performance Management system. Some of these key ministries are; Health, Education, Agriculture and
Natural Resources, Water Resources, Petroleum, Solid Minerals, Housing and Urban Development, Works, Transport, Aviation, Defense, Police Affairs and Communication
Technology.
102
The states are Bauchi, Cross River and Kaduna.
103
Cross River, Bauchi, Kaduna, Lagos.

102

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators


Time for issuing of audit report on
Annual Accounts by Office of the
Auditor-General reduced from 12
months in 2010 to 2 – 3 6 months
(Federal and States)



Month-end financial statements of
federal Government MDAs
produced within 7 days by 75% of
the MDAs.

Improved budget planning


Use of multi-year budgeting in
FGN and at least 3 states



Medium Term Sectoral Strategies
(MTSS) prepared and published
by 10 ministries in the Lagos State



Preparation of the 2011 budget
based on at least 10 MTSS and in
accordance with the Medium
Term Expenditure Framework

Status and Evaluation Summary
The time for issuing of audit report on Annual
Accounts by Office of the Auditor-General
reduced from 12 months in 2010 to 4.5 months
in Bauchi, 2 months in Cross River and 5
months in Kaduna. At the Federal level, the
four-year backlog in 2005 reduced to a oneyear back log in 2012.
59 percent of the MDAs now produce
automated statements from a zero baseline in
2010. In addition to this, the time taken to
produce these reports reduced to 14 days in
Bauchi, 7 days in Cross River and 14 days in
Kaduna, down from an average of 60 days at
the inception of the CPS.
Status: Achieved.

Lending and Non-Lending
Lessons and Suggestions for
Activities that Contributed to
the new CPS
the outcomes
Dialogue; Capacity
implementation across states.
Strengthening of ICAN to
Support National and Regional
Accountancy Development

Multi-year budgeting now taking place at
Federal level and in Bauchi, Cross River,
Kaduna and Lagos States.

Lending:
NG State Governance project I
(FY05-11), Federal DPC
(FY10), Lagos DPC (FY11) &
EDO Growth and
Employment Project (FY12)

The CPS target was achieved beyond the initial
plan: As of April 2013, twenty Five (25)
Ministries104 in Lagos State are now preparing
and publishing MTSS. DFID SPARC
supported the MDAs to develop the MTSS and
build internal capacity for budget preparation.
Appreciable progress has been made where the

Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance: Sector
Dialogue

104

The MTSS initiative has been of
critical importance in helping to
focus Government spending on
its strategic priorities and the
attainment of the MDGs. The
next step to further enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of
budget execution and
expenditure controls is the
planned transition to expenditure
controls at the commitment stage
including a systems-based
control from the point of

The Ministries are: Education; Health; Environment; Rural Development; Agriculture; Housing; Ministry of Economic Planning and Budget; Office of the head of service;
Transportation; Establishment & Training; Youth and Social Development; Office of Sports; Justice; Women and Poverty Alleviation; Information; Finance; Special Duties; Home
Affairs; Tourism and Intergovernmental Relations; Works and Infrastructure; Local Government and Chieftaincy Affairs; Lagos Waterfront Administration; Physical Planning
and Rural Development, Lands Bureau and; State treasury office and Department management office.

103

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators
(MTEF)

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
requisitions to final payment.
This will help the Federal
Government to have direct
control over its expenditure
arrears especially where the rollout of the control process
extends to the planned additional
135 MDAs, equivalent to total
expenditure coverage of 79
percent at the Federal level.

Bank engaged, by introducing a multiyear
perspective to budgeting. Bauchi, Cross River
and Kaduna States prepared 2011 budgets
based on MTSS105 and in accordance with their
MTEF. In 2010, thirteen (13) key federal
MDAs developed and documented MTSS for
the 2011 - 2013 period, which formed the basis
of more detailed budget submissions by the
MDAs; and also for evaluation of the budget
proposals by the parliament.

10. Improved value for money and transparency in the public sector procurement system[rating: Partially Achieved]
Improved value for money and
transparency in the public sector
procurement system

Status: Partially Achieved.



At the Federal level, public contracts awarded
above threshold through open competition
exceeded the CPS target of 90 percent,
increasing to 100 percent whereas the 30
percent value at state level fell below the target
of 70 percent and was only a marginal increase
from the baseline.106



105
106

Public contracts awarded above
threshold through open
competition increased from 50
percent at the Federal level and 25
percent in five selected states to 90
percent at federal and 70 percent
in the states.
Public contracts awards published
increased from 30 percent at the
Federal level and 0 in five selected
states to 100 percent at federal
and 60 percent in the states.

The publication of public contracts awards
performed much better, increasing from 30
percent in 2009 to 100 percent at Federal in
2013. In the states, it increased from 0 to
between 90 and 100 percent; Lagos, Edo, Cross
River, Bauchi, Rivers and Kaduna now publish
100 percent of all contracts above approved

These are in 10 key sectors.
The states are Lagos, Edo Rivers, Bauchi, Kaduna, Ekiti, Osun and Cross River.

104

Lending:
NG State Governance project I
(FY05-11), Economic Reform
and Governance Project
(FY05-13)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Programmatic Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment; Public
procurement value chain
analysis at the Federal level,
NG: Promoting Good
Governance Niger Delta, Ekiti
Procurement Reform
Initiative.

The findings of the
Programmatic Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment
contributed to the lending to two
States (Lagos and Edo) using the
DPO approach. The public
procurement value chain analysis
at the Federal level will help to
further identify bottlenecks in the
current Government practices
that can hinder effective and
efficient use of public resources.
The study also suggested
mitigating measures to address
the identified bottlenecks.
Although substantial progress
has been made in PFM reform
both at Federal and State levels,
it will be necessary to intensify

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

efforts aimed at full
implementation of this agenda in
the next phase of support by
deepening dialogue with the
slow reforming States.
Third party procurement
monitoring will continue to
feature in the new CPS to
strengthen the established
building blocks and further
consolidate budding results.

threshold, while Bauchi publishes 90 percent
from a baseline of 30 percent at federal and
zero at state level.


Number of MDAs with third
party procurement monitoring
increased from 0 in 2010 at the
Federal and State levels to 40
MDAs at federal and 20 MDAs in
the states.

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS

Procurement third party monitoring by
organized civil societies has been introduced
and MDAs with third party monitoring have
increased to 28 at Federal and 12 at State level,
falling below the CPS target of 40 MDAs at
Federal and 20 at State level.107 However, an
electronic procurement portal has been
established to further strengthen accountability.

11. Strengthened national statistical system [rating: Partially Achieved]
Strengthened national statistical system
 Annual
and
monthly
data
disseminated by the NSS or NBS
according to agreed pre-published
release schedules


107

Statistical template for production
of annual State Statistical Year
Book by states

Status: Partially Achieved.
83 percent of the targeted 100 percent of
statistical outputs released within GDDS time
and frequency limits, falling below the CPS
target of 100 percent but well above the
baseline of 10 percent in 2010.
As of December 2012, 15 states (Niger, Ondo,
Lagos, Anambra, Ogun, Kano, Ekiti, Oyo,
Zamfara, Borno, Ebonyi, Bayelsa, Kebbi, Cross
River and Bauchi) have statistical year book no
older than 2010, nearly reaching the CPS target
of 17 States from a zero base. The statistical
agencies at federal and state level have
improved their capacity considerably within the

The states are Lagos, River, Cross River, Bayelsa, Edo, Nasarawa, Enugu and Kaduna.

105

Lending:
Economic Reform and
Governance Project (FY0513)
Knowledge Activities and
Technical Assistance:
Nigeria: Building Statistical
Capacity at State Level;
Nigeria Statistics
Development Program
(NSDP), LSMS-ISA Nigeria
General Household Survey.

Credible policy formulation and
monitoring of development
progress in all sectors are
severely hampered by the current
poor statistical capacity. In this
context, improving the collection
and processing of data, as well as
optimizing the use of the limited
data available, are key elements
for success in enhancing
governance and decision-making
in the CPS period.
A catalytic effect of the SRF
project has been achieved, with a
New TA Operation being

Annex 1 Summary of Nigeria CPS Program Self-Evaluation Matrix
CPS Period Outcomes to be directly
influenced by the Bank Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary
CPS period. Starting from a very bleak
background, twenty four (24) states108 currently
have statistical master plan in place; 15109 have
passed statistical Laws and 11 state bureau of
statistics110 have been established with state
Statistician General appointed.

108

Lending and Non-Lending
Activities that Contributed to
the outcomes

Lessons and Suggestions for
the new CPS
discussed to support capacity
building efforts including
statistics.

Anambra, Abia, Gombe, Niger, Plateau, Nasarawa, Kwara, Sokoto, Kaduna, Bauchi, Ondo, Ekiti, Lagos, Rivers, Delta, Cross River, Abia, Imo, Ogun, Enugu, Jigawa, Kano,
Bayelsa and Edo
109
Abia, Anambra, Rivers, Cross Rivers, Delta, Ondo, Ekiti, Niger, Kwara, Nasarawa, Sokoto, Zamfara, Gombe and Imo
110
Anambra, Ondo, Cross River, Niger, Kwara, Ekiti, Lagos, Zamfara, Oyo and Gombe

106

Annex 2: FY10-13 CPS IDA Program Plan and Actual
Project

FY10
First National Urban Water Sector AF
Second National Urban Water Sector AF
Rural Access and Mobility Project (RAMP) II
State Governance and Capacity Building II

Indicative
Amount
($M)

Actual
Amount
($M)

Year
Approved

Comments (as of end-November 2012)

100
80
100
100

80
120
170
120

FY10
FY12
FY13
FY10

Not signed.
Not signed. Additional $25M in FY14.
Renamed State Governance and Capacity Building and approved
as Nigeria Public Sector Governance Reform and Development.
Project signed but not effective as of September 2012.
Renamed GEM. Not signed. IDA15 allocation.

Growth, Employment and Markets in States
(GEMS)
Financial Sector DPO
Lagos Urban Transport II
Sub-Total for FY10
FY11
Conditional Cash Transfer

175

160

FY11

500
150
1,205

500
190
890

FY10
FY10

Financial Sector and PFM Development Policy Credit

FY13

Originally funded in FY09 for FY10 delivery. Additional
funding in FY10 and FY12. To be included as a component of
YESSO (FY13)

Public/Private Partnership
State Health

300
300

115
150

FY11
FY12

Energy Project

200

100

FY12

Agriculture Competitiveness

100

45

FY11

State DPO

200

200

FY11

Polio AF
Sub-Total for FY11
FY12
Climate Risk Management

--1,200

60
580

FY11

Rural Access and Renewable Energy

100

100

100

Not signed. Additional $20M grant from HRIDF trust fund.
Started project development in FY10 but discussion was
lengthy.
Approved as AF and not signed. PRG for another $100M, so
IDA credit used is $25M
Nigeria’s share of the West Africa Agricultural Productivity
Program (WAAPP)
Lagos. This was to be first in a series of programmatic DPOs,
with two more of $200M each. Also, the CPS intended to have
programmatic vertical DPOs. Post-CPS, it was decided to do
horizontal DPOs in 8 states (check CPS PR). Lagos DPO II and
horizontal DPO were funded for FY13.

CPS PR raised this to $450M. Component of NEWMAP
(FY13), which is for a total of $500M.

107

Annex 2: FY10-13 CPS IDA Program Plan and Actual
Project
Electricity Transmission and Distribution
Youth Employment Scheme

Indicative
Amount
($M)
200
100

Actual
Amount
($M)
200

Comments (as of end-November 2012)

State Education III

150

Maternal Child Health Nutrition
Malaria II
State DPO (different state)

200
200
100

75

FY12

Nigeria Electricity Generation Improvement Project
AF
Nigeria Erosion and Watershed Management
Project (NEWMAP)
State Employment and Expenditure for Results
Project (SEEFOR)
Sub-Total for FY12
2013
State Governance and Capacity Building III
State DPO (different state)

---

100

FY12

Edo State, not signed. Previous Government approved only
$50M in the borrowing plan. Pending approval of an additional
$25M.
Not signed. PRG for $100M, so IDA allocation used is $25M

---

500

FY12

Not signed.

---

200

FY12

Originally funded for FY11 delivery and renamed from State
Expenditure Effectiveness and Opportunities. Not signed.

1,150

1,345

100
200

---

---

State DPO (different state)

200

---

---

Agriculture Productivity
Transport Infrastructure
Public Private Partnership

200
300
---

200

Polio Eradication Support
Youth Employment and Social Support (YESSO)
Agriculture DPO

-------

95
300
100

Year
Approved
FY12
FY13

FY13
FY13
FY13

108

Dropped
Funded starting in FY10. To be included as a component of
YESSO (FY13)
Renamed State Education Program Investment. Planned Board:
2013. State Education Project III originally funded for FY09
(P106280) was dropped.
CPS Progress Report said other donors will take lead in Health

Dropped in CPS CR
While the CPS considered vertical DPOs, the Bank realized this
was a politically sensitive issue and considered in 2010 to
having horizontal DPOs in up to eight states. However, the new
Government is not favorable to state DPOs so the DPO series
are currently off the table.
Same as above. The CPS put in up to another $200M for the
DPO series
Amount reduced to $278M in the CPS Completion Report
New in CPS Completion Report even though the 1st PPP is not
disbursing. Was funded in FY12 for FY13 delivery. Now
dropped.
Not signed.
Board: May 2013. Another $100M in FY14.

Annex 2: FY10-13 CPS IDA Program Plan and Actual
Project
Commercial Agriculture Development AF
Fadama III AF
Irrigation and Water

Sub-Total for FY13
FY10-FY13 Total
MEMORANDUM
State and Local Governance Reform Project
Additional Financing from the EU for the SEEFOR
Project in Nigeria

Indicative
Amount
($M)
-------

Actual
Amount
($M)
150
150

1,000
4,555

1,115
3,930

-----

75
100

Comments (as of end-November 2012)
Year
Approved
FY13
FY13

FY13
FY13

109

Board: May 2013
Board: May 2013
Added in CPS Completion Report for $400M in FY13.
However, this project was funded in FY11 and FY12 for
delivery in FY12. Now postponed to FY14.

EU Funded. RVP presentation in … 2013
EU funded. RVP presentation in November 2013

111

Product

Ongoing
ICT Policy Dialogue
FSS 2020 Phase 2
Projects Procurement Capacity Building
EITI Management and Gas and Oil
Communication Outreach
Proposed in CPS
Lagos PER
Governance of Service Delivery Phase II for
FY10 water and FY11 State Health
Energy Sector Policy Analysis for energy
lending in FY12
Investment Climate Assessment
Community Based Health and Nutrition for
FY12 Maternal and Child Health
Agriculture Strategy and NACRDB
Restructuring for Agricultural
Competitiveness in FY11
Fiscal Federalism Phase II
Transport Dialogue
Poverty Monitoring
Results Based M&E for Vision 20:2020
Skills Development
State Level PER
Education Sector Strategy [same as the
Country Status Report Education?]
Climate Risk Assessment
Poverty/Growth Assessment
Customs Reform/Revenue Enhancement
Financing of Tertiary Education
New
111

Annex 3: FY10-FY13 Indicative and Actual AAA
Output
Year of
Cost ($’000s)
Year
Completion
BB
TF
Total
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10

Dropped

FY10
FY10

FY10
FY11

FY10

FY11

FY10
FY10
FY10

Comments

Dropped
139
166

139
166

FY11
FY11

38

38

Dropped

101

101

577

577

FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY11
FY11
FY11

FY11
Dropped

FY11
FY11
FY11
FY12

Dropped
FY11

Originally funded $100K for FY09 delivery

Dropped
Dropped
Originally funded $300K in FY09

The CPS noted that for FY12 to FY13, many of the FY10/11 will continue and new AAA added in FY12 and FY13 based on client demand.

110

111

Product
Financial Sector Strategy
Malaria Control
Socio-Economic Assessment
New in the CPS Progress Report
ROSC Accounting
Investment Climate Program
Skills Development in IT and ITES
Climate Change Implications for Growth in
the Non-oil Sector in Nigeria
Federal Government of Nigeria PEFA plus
(EFO 353)
State Public Expenditure Management
Strengthening Sector Governance and
Promoting Partnership for Service Delivery
Promoting Good Governance in Nigeria’s
Niger Delta
PSIA on Petroleum Subsidies
Programmatic Integrated Fiduciary
Assessment
Dialogue with Civil Society
Transforming Nigeria Into West Africa Lion
Regional Integration AAA
EITI Management and Gas and Oil Sector
Policy Phase II
PPIAF/SNTA Nigeria Credit Rating and
Credit Advisory
Social Safety Nets Development Dialogue
and Policy Development

Annex 3: FY10-FY13 Indicative and Actual AAA
Output
Year of
Cost ($’000s)
Year
Completion
BB
TF
Total
FY10
FY10
FY11
FY11
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13
FY13

111

Comments

Annex 4: ICR Ratings for Projects Evaluated During the CPS Period

Proj ID

Exit
FY

Project Name

Eval Date

IEG
Outco
me

IEG
Bank
Qual
@
Entr
y

IEG Bank
Supervisio
n

IEG
Overal
l Bank
Perf.

IEG
Borrower
Implement
n

IEG
Borrower
Complianc
e

IEG
Overall
Borrowe
r Perf.

IEG
ICR
Qualit
y

M&
E
Qual

10/20/201
1

HS

HS

HS

HS

HS

S

S

S

Substanti
al

10/31/201
2

U

MU

MS

MU

MS

MU

MU

S

Negligibl
e

7/14/2011

MS

MS

MS

MS

MU

MS

MS

S

Modest

8/1/2011

MS

MS

S

MS

MS

MU

MS

S

Substanti
al

9/4/2012

S

S

S

S

MS

S

MS

S

Substanti
al

P063622

NG-Fadama SIL 2 (FY04)

P070291

NG-HIV/AIDS
(FY02)

P070293

NG-Privatization
(FY01)

P117088

Fin Sec + Pub Fin Mgmt DPC

P100122

Avian Influenza
ERL (FY06)

P070290

NG- Health System Dev. II
(FY02)

4/26/2013

MU

MU

MU

MU

MU

U

U

S

Negligibl
e

P074447

NG-State Governance & Cp
Bldg TAL (FY05)

5/2/2013

S

MS

S

S

MS

MS

MS

S

Substanti
al

P080295

NG-Polio Eradication (FY03)

2/25/2013

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

S

Substanti
al

P083082

MSME

5/28/2013

MS

MS

MS

MS

MU

U

MU

S

Modest

P096151

NG - State Edu Sector Project

1/9/2013

MS

MS

MS

MS

MS

MS

MS

S

Substanti
al

Prog
Supt

Dev
SIL

Emergency

2010

2011

2012

112

ANNEX 8: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE FRAMEWORK FOR THE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE FRAMEWORK
FOR THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
NIGERIA

March, 2013

113

Table of Contents
The Country Assistance Framework

What is the CAF?
The Rationale for the CAF
A. DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT
1. Country Background
2. Country Vision
3. The Economy and Budgetary Management

B. OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
1. Opportunities
2. Challenges

C. CAF FRAMEWORK AND FOCUS
1. Fundamentals
2. Strategic Directions
3. Approach

D. CAF PRINCIPLES AND MODALITY OF ENGAGEMENT
E. RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION STRATEGIES
F. ANNEXES
Annex 1. Government’s Process for Handling External Financing of Projects
Annex 2. Total Donor Commitments as of end-December 2012
Annex 3. Distribution of Donor Funds Per Partner Agency
Annex 4. Distribution of Donor Funds per Sector

114

A. THE COUNTRY ASSISTANCE FRAMEWORK
1. What is CAF?
1.
The Country Assistance Framework (CAF) is the common strategic approach of
Nigeria’s development partners in support of the Government’s development plans. The CAF is
derived from the program priorities articulated in Vision 20:2020 and its implementation
strategy, the Transformation Agenda (TA) 2011-2015. It was developed through a dynamic
priority-setting process characterized by inclusiveness and stakeholder consultations, and
focused on achieving national ownership of the development agenda.
2.
The CAF is also a platform to increase aid effectiveness in Nigeria. In line with the
Paris Declaration and Accra Agenda for Action, the CAF is intended as an instrument to promote
donor coordination and improve aid effectiveness through better harmonization of interventions,
avoidance of duplication of tasks, use of common implementation mechanisms wherever
possible, and periodic discussions around key themes/topics and consultations within and across
sectors.
3.
The CAF is a living document as well as an instrument for policy dialogue. It facilitates
discussion and cooperation among partners and stakeholders, and provides flexibility in
responding to Nigeria’s evolving social, economic, and political context. Partners have agreed to
formulate their respective country programs and strategies in line with the CAF in order to
amplify the development impact of their assistance.
4.
The CAF sets out two strategic levels of results expected from the cooperation of
development partners. Vision 20:2020 and the Transformation Agenda represent the broad, highlevel changes in each of the CAF priority areas to which the partners will contribute. The second
strategic tier of results will be elaborated separately by each of the CAF partners and reflected in
their respective country programs and strategies.
2. Rationale for the CAF
5.
The CAF seeks to streamline partners’ support in order to increase aid effectiveness,
accelerate implementation, and deliver rapid transformational results. The effectiveness of this
assistance to Nigeria will not derive exclusively from the size of financial contributions, which
are small relative to the country’s own resources. Total ODA assistance received by Nigeria in
2010 was US$2.05 billion,112 compared to the gross domestic product (GDP) in the same year of
close to US$200 billion113 and the federal budget of US$26.6 billion.
6.
Nigeria is a dominant economic and financial force across West Africa, and its success will
impact the entire Sub-Saharan region. It is home to more than 20 percent of sub-Saharan Africa’s
population, the largest oil producing country in Africa, and the tenth largest global producer. It
has the sixth largest Muslim population in the world, and is by far the largest country in the
world to have nearly equal numbers of Christians and Muslims. It is also the fifth largest
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping forces. As the most influential and militarily
powerful member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Nigeria has
112
113

OECD statistics.
In 2010, the Nigeria economy was ranked the 45th in the world in terms of its gross domestic product (WB).

115

played a key role in helping to resolve major political and security disputes in West Africa, from
the Liberian and Sierra Leone crises in the 1990s to the political problems in Guinea, Niger, Côte
d’Ivoire in the past few years, to Guinea Bissau more recently
7.
Nigeria also presents some complex development challenges. It displays the characteristics
of various types of African economies, namely: (i) a middle income economy with buoyant
activity in the Lagos metropolitan area with a vibrant financial and private sector; (ii) a natural
resource rich country facing the challenges of managing the rent and translating these resources
into improved social outcomes, especially for the poor and the most vulnerable; (iii) a country
facing complex security challenges ranging from militant extremism and inter-communal
conflict over resources to ethno-religious polarization and organized crime; and (iv) the rest of
the country which displays the features of a typical low income Sub-Saharan African economy
with high levels of inequality.

B. DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT
a. Country Background
8.
Nigeria is a federal state, comprising the federal capital territory administration, 36 state
Governments, and 774 local Government councils (LGCs). The 1999 Constitution gave
significant autonomy to the states in the delivery of economic and social services and the
provision of infrastructure, both directly and jointly with local Governments. The Federal
Government remains responsible for setting standards, coordinating policy, and discharging
national functions such as security, foreign affairs, and macroeconomic management.

b. Country Vision
9.
Nigeria aims to become one of the 20 largest economies in the world by year 2020. Its
long-term development agenda, as laid in the Vision 20:2020 (NV 20:2020), focuses on
focusing on two broad objectives: (a) optimizing the country’s human and natural resource
potential to achieve rapid and sustained economic growth, and (b) translating economic growth
into equitable social development that guarantees a dignified and meaningful existence for all
citizens.
10. The implementation plan for the Nigeria Vision 20:2020 is in three phases: the First
National Implementation Plan (2010 – 2013); the Second (2014-2017); and the Third (20182020). As part of the operationalization of the NV20:2020, the Government has developed a
medium-term strategy to transform the Nigerian economy during the period 2012-2015 which is
articulated in the 2011 Transformation Agenda (TA).
11. The Transformation Agenda is focused on: (a) building fiscal buffers in the uncertain global
environment and safeguard macroeconomic stability, (b) making growth more inclusive and (c)
supporting economic diversification and increasing the competitiveness of Nigeria’s economy.
The TA is underpinned by a fiscal reform program that seeks to reduce the deficit of the federal
Government, maintain domestic debt, and increase capital spending, particularly for
infrastructure where the needs are huge.
12. These priorities are interlinked, with progress in one area supporting and depending on
advances in the others. Inclusive growth will require a sustainable increase in employment, which in
116

turn will depend on faster growth in the non-oil sector, and a more skilled and competitive labor
force. In addition, all levels of Government will need to improve service delivery efficiency,
particularly in sectors related to the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
13. An integrated and coordinated approach across and between all levels of Government is
critical for the realization of Nigeria’s development goals. The country vision is complemented
at state levels by State Economic Development and Empowerment Strategy, where those exist.
Many states in Nigeria lack their own development strategies, missing to make the full use of
their high degree of autonomy.
14. Nigerian states operate with a high degree of legal and de facto autonomy in the areas of
service delivery, internal organization, and revenue generation, which coexists with a strong
federal mandate in the areas of public order, control over subnational borrowing, and
appointments to the judiciary. While this autonomy provides states, particularly those with
dynamic and progressive leadership, an opportunity to move ahead on their own, it also poses a
challenge to building national consensus across different levels of Government, including in the
areas of macroeconomic stability (management of oil wealth and the general Government
budget), prioritizing public resource allocation, and meeting minimal national standards in
service delivery. Creating consensus in those areas can be a difficult task, particularly
considering the country’s political and institutional complexities. The high level of state
autonomy also poses a challenge to creating a framework for convergence toward the best
experiences, which would significantly enhance the country’s progress toward achieving its
goals. For example, if Nigeria adopted nationwide all of the state-level best practices identified
in Doing Business 2010, it would rank 72nd out of 183 economies globally – 53 places above its
actual ranking.

c. The Economy and Budgetary Management
15. Since the return to democratic rule, Nigeria has experienced more than a decade of rapid
GDP growth. The Nigerian economy exhibited strong GDP growth over the last decade,
averaging close to 8 percent. This growth has been driven by a rapid expansion of domestic
demand, and concentrated in sectors servicing the Nigerian market, most notably trade and
agriculture. In 2012, growth in trade and agriculture slowed in the context of a national strike (in
January), severe flooding, and growing security challenges to business in parts of the North. By
preliminary estimates GDP growth in 2012 amounted to 6.6 percent, as opposed to 7.4 percent in
2011.
16.
The high dependence on inherently volatile oil revenues presents major balance of
payments and budgetary risks to the country. Nigeria is highly dependent on oil, which accounts
for over 95 percent of exports, nearly about 75 percent of consolidated Government revenues,
and over 40 percent of GDP (at current prices). The uncertain global environment and associated
oil price volatility emphasize the critical importance of prudent macroeconomic management and
economic diversification in order to reduce the vulnerability of the country’s public finance and
balance of payments to a fall in oil prices.
17. Nigeria made a major step forward in responsible macroeconomic management by creating
the Excess Crude Account (ECA) as a fiscal reserve fund in 2004. Oil revenues accruing to the
Government over and above an agreed benchmark price go to this fund. By September, 2008,
Nigeria had accumulated US$22 billion in the ECA, much of which was subsequently used to
117

finance a fiscal stimulus package that maintained economic demand and rapid growth during the
world financial crisis of 2008-2009. Nevertheless, remaining institutional vulnerabilities
surrounding the ECA surfaced visibly in 2010 and early 2011, when political pressures led to
excessive ad hoc withdrawals from the ECA, thus financing a large pro-cyclical fiscal expansion
that put Nigeria’s reserve position and financial stability at risk.
18. Fortunately, the Government has worked to restore the countercyclical fiscal policy since
mid-2011. The Federal Government has reduced its fiscal deficit to well under the 3 percent of
GDP cap specified in the Fiscal Responsibility Law. The general Government deficit fell from an
estimated 6.6 percent of GDP in 2009 and 5.7 percent of GDP in 2010 to 2.2 percent in 2011. In
2012, budgetary consolidation has continued, while the Government succeeded in reducing fuel
subsidy payments by both reducing the subsidy rate and cracking down on corruption. The
federal deficit is expected at 2.4percent of GDP (versus 2.6percent in 2011) and the general
Government deficit should be about 1.9percent. The ECA has re-accumulated from a very low
level at the end of 2010 to close to US$9 billion in early 2013. Nevertheless, prudent
macroeconomic management continues to face challenges, particularly as the Excess Crude
Account in Nigeria is managed and owned not only by the Federal Government, but by Nigerian
States as well. The Government and National Assembly responded by passing a law in 2011 that
establishes a new Sovereign Wealth Fund that will likely be less vulnerable than the ECA to
political demands for ad hoc withdrawals. However, political controversies have so far delayed
the transfer of functions from the ECA to the Sovereign Wealth Fund.
19. Over the near term, Nigeria faces a challenge of very slow or negligible growth in oil
output, which implies that oil revenues should become an increasingly smaller share of GDP. In
2012, Government oil revenues already declined from an estimated 23 percent of GDP to 19.5
percent, despite generally strong oil prices. This speaks for the imperative of compensating for
declines in oil receipts with increases in non-oil revenues. In the context of shrinking oil
revenues relative to GDP, the opportunity cost of the fuel subsidy is increasing. The fuel subsidy,
accounted for 4.6 percent and 2.5 percent of GDP in 2011 and 2012, respectively. An attempt by
the Government to remove the fuel subsidy in January 2012 met with massive unrest and a
national strike, which led to a compromise solution that doubled the enforced fixed naira price
for petrol. Given inflation and (possible) currency depreciation, the fiscal burden of the subsidy
(enforcing a fixed naira price for fuel) can grow rapidly with time, eventually reaching
unsustainable levels.
20. The lack of official fiscal data at state level, with harmonized definitions and classifications
comparable to those for the federal Government, further complicates the formulation of fiscal
policy and the monitoring of its implementation at different levels of Government. Nevertheless,
the FAAC has begun to take steps, in association with States, to roll-out a uniform chart of
accounts and budget classification system, consistent with Government Finance Statistics (GFS)
in order to harmonize the fiscal operations reporting across the Federation.

118

Key Macroeconomic Indicators21. Nigeria's debt position remains strong, with increasing
emphasis on controlling domestic borrowing. Following the restructuring and write-off of its
debt obligations to the Paris Club in 2005, Nigeria has committed to a yearly Debt Sustainability
Analysis (DSA) exercise to monitor its debt portfolio and forestall potential crises.114 The 2012
DSA established that Nigeria remains at a low risk of debt distress with a robust debt outlook in
the short to medium term based on standardized stress tests. External sovereign debt remains less
than 3 percent of GDP and this is expected to remain the case over the short term. On the other
hand, the domestic debt level has risen to 16 percent of GDP and is expected to rise further in the
medium term. In response to the rapid growth in domestic debt and the high associated
borrowing costs, particularly at the state level, the 2012 DSA recommends a shift from domestic
to external sources of borrowing. The 2012 DSA also recognizes the potential impact of a
negative oil price shock on debt sustainability and has recommended the implementation of
policies that will fast-track the diversification of the economy to non-oil sources of revenue.

C. OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
22. Nigeria remains a country of opportunities and challenges. Its presence is felt across the
West Africa region, and it accounts for an estimated 70 percent of the regions’ GDP. It is the
second largest economy in Sub-Saharan Africa, after South Africa, and has the potential to
become the largest, with even greater positive spill-over effects throughout the region. Nigeria is
the most populous country in Africa, with an estimated population of 171 million in 2013. It is
also the biggest oil exporter in Africa, and has the largest natural gas reserves on the continent.
With these large reserves of human and natural resources, Nigeria is poised to build a prosperous
economy; significantly reduce poverty; and provide health, education, and infrastructure services
to its population.
23. In spite of its natural resource wealth and relatively strong economic growth over the last
seven years, Nigeria faces widespread poverty and inequality, high youth unemployment,
inadequate service delivery, low MDG indicators, and governance challenges. The oil industry
creates few jobs, therefore failing to tackle the rising rate of youth unemployment in the country.
All of these factors have fuelled grievances which gave given rise to violence that broke out,
creating security risks in the country and the region. The 2012 Global Peace Index notes that in
2011 and early 2012 Nigeria experienced the second largest deterioration among Sub-Saharan
countries and was ranked 146 out of 158 countries.115

a. Opportunities
24. The Transformation Agenda assigns great importance to supporting non-oil sectors that
have strong job creation and multiplier potential, such as housing and agriculture. Nigeria’s
114

DSA is conducted by the Debt Management Office.
Other global fragility and conflict indices rank Nigeria similarly low and show a downward trend over recent
years. Nigeria is in the bottom 4 percent countries globally in the World Bank ratings of Political Stability and
Absence of Violence. The Failed State Index has repeatedly ranked Nigeria as in ‘danger’, the second-worst
category, most recently as number 14 out of 177 countries (Failed State index 2012).

115

119

housing sector grew at 12.6 percent over 2006-2010, fueled by rapid urbanization, but there is
still an estimated housing gap of 700,000 houses in different market segments. Government is
working on developing housing finance mechanisms to support the sector and unlock its job
creation potential.
25. The Government has embarked on an ambitious plan to modernize the agriculture sector,
which accounts for a substantial share of non-oil GDP and employs 70 percent of the population.
The sector recorded modest improvement in overall performance in recent years; it grew by
about 6.8 percent annually between 2005 and 2009. However, this has been attributed mostly to
land area expansion. While data on agricultural production in Nigeria are weak, it is widely
recognized that Nigeria’s agriculture sector continues to have a high growth potential, and the
Government is strongly committed to increasing productivity, guaranteeing food security,
encouraging better use of existing cultivable areas and improving food processing capacity. The
Agricultural Transformation Agenda aims to transform agriculture into a modern and
commercially oriented sector with value-chain linkages to manufacturing. Efforts to encourage
private investment include tax and tariff incentives. Moving forward, such measures will need to
be regularly re-evaluated to encourage firms to wean themselves from this support – otherwise,
policies meant to help firms in their formative years might become a disincentive for improving
efficiency and productivity. Realizing the potential of agriculture will also depend on addressing
structural bottlenecks and reducing the cost of doing business in the sector.
26. Nigeria’s significant mineral deposits also represent a strategic opportunity for growth.
Before the oil boom of the 1970s, coal and tin were among the natural resources mined on a
massive scale, with the former being used to generate electricity, power the railway network, and
meet the demands of regional and international markets. Lead and zinc were a significant source
of export revenue, and Nigeria was the world's largest exporter of columbite. Recently, there has
been a growing recognition of the potential of the solid minerals sector for diversifying the
economy. The Government’s commitment to mining sector is increasing along with revenues
and employment generation, and more exploration is taking place by international companies.
The Government recently developed a long-term roadmap for transformation of the solid
minerals and metals sector as strategic catalysts of growth. A Solid Mineral Development Fund
(SMDF) is being created in accordance with the Mining Act to fund the reforms articulated in the
roadmap. The SMDF, in turn, is to be funded by the President-approved Natural Resources
Development Fund (NRDF), which is a constitutional established fund to promote natural
resources development as a whole. These efforts need to be reinforced by developing and
implementing a well-functioning institutional framework that ensures inclusiveness and good
corporate governance.
27. Rapid urbanization, while challenging, is another opportunity to boost growth and reduce
poverty. Over the years, Nigeria has experienced rapid urbanization, with 50 percent of its
population living in urban centers in 2010. The projected continuous high population growth will
intensify the urbanization process (UN 2012), further increasing opportunities for income
diversification, expanding options for more affordable service delivery, and widening horizons
for innovation and skills acquisition. Accomplishing that will require a focus on both rural and
urban development, improving livability of cities and villages, creating more jobs in cities and
more off-farm jobs in rural Nigeria, improved urban management, and enhanced integration of
domestic markets.

120

28. Strong efforts are needed to unlock the potential of cities to support economic growth.
Traffic congestion costs, poor service coverage and delivery, and low quality infrastructure all
negatively affect the competitiveness of urban areas and their capacity to support local economic
growth and attract investment. The lack of effective urban governance is also a major issue
across all states and cities. While the Constitution identifies local Government as the third tier of
Government after the federal Government and state Governments, the presence of several local
Government units (LGUs) within most large municipal areas has critically reduced the prospects
for a cohesive management of large urban areas.
29. Further, most LGUs lack the capacity to sustainably finance and maintain urban services
and infrastructure or to effectively accommodate an informal economy. This has had a negative
impact on city landscapes, and on cities’ contribution to the national economy. The absence of an
integrated approach at the local and state/Federal levels to maximize the growth potential of
cities further complicates these challenges. If the economic growth and job creation of cities is to
be unleashed, it will be necessary for Nigeria to implement needed policy and institutional
reforms in land use planning and develop sustainable strategies to enhance investment in urban
infrastructure and service delivery.
30. Nigeria also has opportunity for growth and diversification through regional and global
integration, both of which have been associated with higher long-run growth. China, Korea,
India, Brazil, Malaysia, Vietnam, Indonesia and Mexico have all become industrial powerhouses through transformation of their export structure.
31. The West Africa Economic Community has a population of 300 million, and further
consolidation of this large regional market is likely to attract more foreign direct investment and
create economies of scale that would directly benefit Nigeria. There has been some progress, but
trade networks within West Africa still are not well developed (intra-regional trade accounts for
merely 10 percent of GDP), which constraints Nigeria’s ability to tap into the short and mediumterm growth opportunities offered by the regional market. Nigeria’s ambitious Agriculture
Transformation Agenda as well as strategies and programs adopted in the framework of the
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) could be useful instruments
to boost investment in the sector. However, the Government would need to adopt more open
trade policies aligned with the ECOWAS trade regime, along with measures to simplify border
customs procedures.
32. The West African regional market also offers significant growth potential for Nigeria’s gasbased industries, including (a) gas to power (supplying both domestic and regional demand
through the West Africa Power Pool); (b) gas-based industrialization, including development of
fertilizer, methanol, and petrochemicals; and (c) development of export capacity through
investments in liquid natural gas (LNG) and regional pipeline infrastructure, building on the
West African Gas Pipeline that currently services Nigeria, Benin, Togo and Ghana.
33. Similarly, the West African market holds tremendous opportunities for Nigeria’s financial
sector. Financial integration with West Africa is one of the strategic pillars of Nigeria’s Financial
Sector Strategy 2020. Efforts are underway to integrate the region’s three leading stock
exchanges—the Nigerian Stock Exchange, the Bourse régionale de valeurs mobilières (BRVM)
in Abidjan, and the Ghana Stock Exchange—and develop mechanisms for cross-listing and
trading. These efforts are taking place in parallel with efforts to promote economic convergence
and monetary union (between ECOWAS and WAMU). The potential for cross‐border portfolio
121

investments by ECOWAS institutions and individuals is high, although full integration is still a
long way off.
34. To fully benefit from the growth potential offered by regional and global integration,
Nigeria would need to develop regionally and globally competitive sectors; diversify exports
through a vibrant and globally competitive private sector; and develop goods and services that
comply with international standards.

b. Challenges
i. Political and Security Challenges
35. Since the transition from the military rule to electoral democracy in 1999, Nigeria has had
four presidential elections, the latest in April 2011. The last general election in 2011 received
high praise for being well-managed, despite some post-election violence in northern Nigeria.
36. Nigeria’s democracy is deepening although some institutions are still weak. Enactment of
the Freedom of Information Act in 2011 strengthened the country’s framework for transparency
and accountability by requiring that all publicly funded institutions must be open about their
operations and expenditures, giving citizens the right to access information about their activities.
The deepening of democratic practices was also evident in the conduct of the 2012 elections for
governorship in Ondo, Adamawa and Edo, which were adjudged as free and fair.
37.
Like other young democracies, Nigeria faces continuing challenges. The political
environment is currently characterized by mistrust among the federal Government, states, and
local councils over oil revenue-sharing arrangement. Concerns are also being voiced about some
tensions between the executive and the legislative arms of the Government. Lastly, focus is
gradually turning toward the 2015 elections which might limit the space for policy reform in the
next 12 to 18 months.
38. Nigeria is also facing a range of complex conflict and security challenges, although the
incidence and causes of violence differ significantly among Nigeria’s 36 states. Some states have
proven to be remarkably resilient, while others have seen violence erupting much more
frequently. Some of the most significant challenges include the insurgency of radical Islamists in
the North; inter-communal violence over access to economic and natural resources and political
power, for example in the Middle Belt states; kidnappings, armed robbery and conflicts over oil
spills especially in the South-East; and ongoing efforts to reintegrate militants under an Amnesty
provision in the Niger Delta. The current situation stems from a mix of historical, ethnic,
regional and religious issues coupled with challenges in the value system, oil and gas resources,
corruption, exclusion, weak checks and balances, poor social participation drive, and poor
service delivery.
39. Many of the long-standing sources of instability have been compounded by the rise of
Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’awati Wal-Jihad (JAS), popularly known as Boko Haram, a violent
Salafist group that began an uprising in 2009. The group carries out frequent attacks on state
institutions and local populations, both Christian and Muslim. It is responsible for the August
2011 attack on the UN building in Abuja. State security forces deployed in response to JAS have
been accused of alleged transgressions against local populations. Moreover, many civilians have

122

fallen victims to inter-communal reprisal attacks carried out in a climate of increasing ethnoreligious polarization.
40. As a result, the death toll in recent years has been on the increase in what had already been
the most violent country in Africa that is not at war. Reliable data are scarce but one of the best
estimates available has recorded an average of 3,000 conflict-related deaths each year between
2006 and 2011.116 Violence against women and girls is underreported but also estimated to be
high.117
41. The impact of violence goes beyond the loss of lives. Violence holds back social and
economic development, and particularly hurts the poorest because they have few assets to begin
with and face enormous challenges in recovering subsequently. Breaking the cycle of violence
requires sustainable solutions that address its root causes and resolve the underlying grievances.
Existing political and development responses are yet to start generating results in this regard.
42. Ultimately, the impact of political and security challenges on Nigeria’s development will
depend on how political and other elites address, in words of Professor Akim Iwayemi, “a trilogy
of discontent in contemporary Nigeria, namely: massive youth joblessness, social inequity, [and]
huge public spending with marginal impact on social well-being of majority of the population
due mainly to waste and large scale corruption.”.118
Governance
43. Lack of a well-functioning civil service poses challenges to achieving sustainable
development outcomes. Decades of authoritarian rule have weakened the state and federal civil
service. Human resources management in general is not well developed, and ghost workers are
common. The degree of freedom with respect to human resources management varies between
the federal agencies – those outside the core civil service, such as the Federal tax authority, enjoy
greater freedom. Affirmative action, patronage and geo-political considerations in appointments
crowd out merit-based hiring, thereby weakening overall capacity. Rotation policies take priority
over continuity, making it difficult to sustain improved capacity over time. Further, the
fragmentation of responsibilities across different commissions and agencies increases the
difficulty of implementing reforms. There has been some success in cleaning up nominal
payrolls and in strengthening merit-based hiring. The most senior positions are now tenured with
renewals tied to performance and some top positions in several key public institutions were
advertised and filled competitively in 2012. Other aspects of civil service reform such as meritbased recruitment, promotion and dismissal, remuneration structures, pension schemes, rotation
policies and training remain largely unaddressed. More broadly, Nigeria still needs to strengthen
public institutions and nurture effective leadership in the public administration. The weak civil
service regime implies that top level leadership is the key to most reform efforts. On the other
hand, many successful reforms championed by visionary leaders have proven unsustainable.
44. There is a great deal of variation across states in their capacity for governance. A new
generation of state governors is emerging, albeit still a minority. Some are beginning to address
public sector reform, through civil service modernization and right sizing, and strengthening
financial management. The emphasis of some governors is being broadened to the quality of
116

www.nigeriawatch.org.
British Council Gender in Nigeria Report (2012).
118
Professor Akin Iwayemi, President, Nigerian Economic Society, Presidential Address Delivered at the 53rd
Annual Conference of the Nigerian Economic Society, Abuja, 27th - 30th August, 2012.
117

123

services provided, and that entails modifying budget structures, inculcating a performance
orientation in staff, and increasing transparency.
45. The three tiers of Government (federal, state and local) in Nigeria have overlapping but
autonomous fiscal and policy jurisdictions for public services that directly impinge on the
MDGs. In such federal settings, progress towards the MDGs is hindered or accelerated
depending on synergy and coordination of policies and service delivery across the layers of
Government. In particular, because Nigeria’s state and local Governments ideally should be
closest to the grassroots in terms of providing basic public services, their actions or inactions
could impact greatly on MDGs. In reality, however, states and local Governments in Nigeria
largely follow the MDGs policy frameworks initiated by the federal Government. The fiscal and
policy autonomy of state Governments is largely circumscribed by weak technical and
institutional capacities. Also, because of the relatively higher concentration of more experienced
public officials at the Federal level, state Governments generally suffer from weaker public
service bureaucracies.
46. Capacity and institutional challenges also affect the policy design and dialogue. Due to
inadequate data collection and monitoring (M&E), policies and funding decisions often are not
informed by facts, and their impacts on poverty reduction and welfare cannot be monitored.
47. While many reforms have been initiated to improve public finance management (PFM),
much remains to be done. Reforms have included strengthening the legislative framework at the
Federal level through the Fiscal Responsibility Act, the Public Procurement Act, and similar
laws and regulations at the state level. Improving the transparency and accountability of the
country’s PFM and procurement systems is essential to improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of service delivery. This will require (a) collating of data to identify bottlenecks in implementing
reforms, (b) providing capacity development and incentives for civil servants in charge of
exercising internal controls; (c) further automating financial management and e-procurement
functions through integrated financial management and information system (IFMIS) at the state
and Federal levels; and (d) enhancing oversight of procurement system performance. The
challenge lies in the uneven capacity and commitment, across states and federal ministries,
departments and agencies (MDAs) to embrace the needed changes and adopt practices consistent
with modern PFM principles. In addition, given the low capital budget execution rates further
capacity building is needed in the areas of procurement, implementation, and project evaluation
to ensure that the planned scaling up of capital spending will result in productive and effective
development.
48. While formal mechanisms of governance such as an independent judiciary, protection of
human rights, legislative oversight, and free and fair elections have improved in recent years,
they remain weak. The independence of parliament, external audit institutions and the judiciary
from vested interests is of concern, and there are few incentives for reform. Given the centrality
of these institutions in the governance of the country, improvements are badly needed.
49. Governance and the complicated political economy of reform are increasingly recognized
as the primary challenges to development in Nigeria. Vested interests, complex networks of
patronage, and traditional loyalties and affiliations result in grand and petty corruption, which is
fueled by the extraordinary rents from oil and gas.
50. Civil society in Nigeria is not yet a reliable watchdog or source of pressure for reform.
While there are many demands for governance reform in the traditional and social media, it is
124

difficult to discern any popular movement that is capable of channeling this dissatisfaction into a
series of actions that can challenge the status quo or ensure the accountability of elected officials.
However, some progress has been made in procurement monitoring at the Federal level with the
development of a procurement observatory by a coalition of civil society organizations.

ii. Competitiveness
51. Nigeria is making progress in improving its competitiveness. The Global Benchmarking
Network has ranked Nigeria 115th in its 2012 Global Competitiveness Report, up from 127th in
2011, due to improved macroeconomic condition and recovery from the financial sector crisis of
2009. Yet, significant challenges still remain.
52. The institutional environment does not support a competitive economy because of
concerns about the protection of property rights, ethics and corruption, undue influence, and
Government inefficiencies, including regarding reform and policy implementation. The public
private interface, business and property, registries, customs at port etc. perform badly when
compared to other economies (reflected in an overall DB ranking of 133 from 183 countries).
The Nigerian trade regime remains restrictive, and ineffectual as Nigeria ranks 149th in the
Trading Across Borders category, in the Doing Business index. In addition, Nigeria ranks 180th
in land administration, among the worst figures in the world. This insecurity of tenure is linked
to lack of investment, especially in the construction sector.
53. Access to and cost of finance are the second and third greatest constraints faced by
firms.119 Financial markets lack the depth to drive economic diversification and job creation, or
finance infrastructure investment. Promoting the financial sector’s role in development is a key
policy priority. Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Nigeria have very limited access to
bank credit or other financial services – in 2011, fewer than 10 percent of SMEs had a loan or
line of credit and SMEs represented only 5 percent of bank lending.120 The banking system (80
percent of financial system assets) is largely focused on servicing the largest Nigeria
corporations in the oil and telecoms sectors and the "value chains" associated with them. Banks
perceive that lending 'beyond the frontier' is too risky, particularly given the recent rise in
Treasury security interest rates.
54. Nigeria is a diverse country with poorly integrated markets. Most Nigerian states still
function largely in isolation and face enormous challenges in moving their economies beyond
subsistence agriculture and local services. To benefit from economies of scale, sharpen
international competitiveness, and improve non-oil growth and income levels, there is a need for
better integration of markets in goods and services, labour, and finance within the country. At
present, the efficient functioning of Nigeria’s domestic market is impeded by physical, policy
and administrative barriers, including poor infrastructure and multiple taxes, fees, and
inspections that constrain the movement of goods and services. Coordinated efforts are needed at
both the federal and state levels to remove these barriers.
55. The country has a large infrastructure deficit, particularly in power and transport. Power:
The electricity grid supplies approximately 4,300 MW of available generation, against an
estimated demand of approximately 10,000 MW. Rural accessibility remains a serious problem,
119
120

Investment Climate Assessment (ICA), 2011.
Financing Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises in Nigeria, April 2012

125

with major repercussions for agricultural and rural development; and 83 percent of Nigerian
business owners consider lack of electricity the biggest obstacle to doing business.121
56. The Government’s power sector reform program is one of the most comprehensive and
complex ever undertaken in Africa. The program (a) establishes an independent regulator for the
sector, the Nigerian Electricity Regulatory Commission; (b) sets up a commercial framework for
the sector, with cost-reflective electricity tariffs; (c) establishes a bulk trader; (d) privatizes the
Power Holding Company of Nigeria’s (PHCN) six successor generation companies; (f)
privatizes the eleven PHCN successor distribution companies; and (g) continues efforts to
strengthen the gas-to-power segment. The first three pillars are already in place, and have led to
some tangible improvements in available supply, increased grid stability, increased revenue
collection, and the introduction of a cost-reflective, multi-year tariff. The privatization process is
ongoing but faces resistance that will require sustained commitment to overcome.
57. Any increase in electricity generation is dependent on improved gas-to-power
infrastructure. Nigeria has an estimated 185 trillion cubic feet of gas reserves, the eighth largest
in the world and the largest in Africa. Increasing attention is now being given to this vital sector,
both to meet increasing domestic demand and to develop regional exports. The development of
alternative markets for Nigerian gas – LNG exports through the Bonny LNG terminal; regional
exports through the 678 km West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP)122 to Benin, Ghana, and Togo –
has increased incentives for commercializing gas assets. The Government has responded by
developing the Gas Master Plan, which outlines reforms needed in the sector. Initial results can
already be seen. Gas deliveries to the domestic market and the power sector reached 1000
mmscfd in 2012, an all-time high, compared to only about 300 mmscfd in 2009. Commercial
negotiations are advancing to establish fair and equitable gas supply and aggregation contracts.
And the improved availability and lower cost of gas compared to alternative fuels have triggered
renewed interest from WAGP countries, which want to increase deliveries beyond the 133
mmscfd already agreed.
58. Transport: Nigeria’s national rail network is second only to South Africa’s in length, but
traffic volumes have all but collapsed. 123 Due to deficient performance and erratic services,
traffic volumes have been on a long-term decline from 3 million tons in 1960 to 15,000 tons in
2005 – equivalent to about five trucks per day.124
59. Revamping the transport infrastructure sector remains one of the key focal points for
supporting growth. The Government has committed to a massive rehabilitation of roads and
airports across the country, and has intensified efforts to fix the railways. However, an integrated
multi-modal approach is needed to prioritize projects, and to take advantage of growth corridors
and increasing urbanization over the medium term. Spatial planning could be particularly
advantageous. In addition to facilitating greater integration across the housing, transport, energy
and industry sectors, spatial planning would help to align rural road and agricultural development
policies; align national and local systems of urban and rural development; and take account of
environmental considerations. Rural areas in Nigeria are poorly connected to cities, resulting in
weak value chains for agricultural products and slow rates of off-farm job creation. A multi121

ICA, 2011.
The Escravos-Lagos pipeline system has a capacity of 800 mmscfd, but currently is only used at 130 mmscfd due
to supply constraints.
123
Nigeria’s Infrastructure: A Continental Perspective, AICD, V. Foster, N. Pushak, 2011.
124
Idem.
122

126

modal, spatial planning approach could also serve as a framework for phasing investments in line
with available resources.
60. Skills: An adequate skills base is essential to achieve sustainable and inclusive economic
growth. Nigeria faces skills gaps in both formal and informal sectors which are hindering the
country’s efforts to improve competitiveness and increase employment. Universities and
technical and vocational training institutions tend to be supply rather than demand driven. This
leads to many graduates being unable to find jobs, while skills remain in short supply in some
industries. 125 The first pilot from Assessment of Core Competence for Employability in the
Services Sector (ACCESS)126 in Abuja, Lagos, Kaduna, Kano, and Enugu found that students do
not have the skills needed for employment in that sector.127 Critical factors contributing to the
low quality and relevance of training include a poor learning environment, as measured by
physical facilities, essential textbooks, and instructional aids; lack of teachers in core subjects
and in rural areas; low teacher attendance; and poor teaching quality due to inadequate teacher
training, low motivation, and limited opportunities for professional development. These
problems are compounded by the lack of coordination and dialogue among training institutions,
research institutions, universities, ministries, and private sector employers about needed skills
and training opportunities. Underlying Nigeria’s skills gap are weak basic education system, the
lack of coordination and dialogue between training institutions, research institutions, universities,
and ministries with those from the industries and private sector, leading to out of date curriculum
and low quality of education and training.
61. Nigeria’s universal primary education policy, first implemented in 1976 and reinstated in
1999 and 2004 mandates free, compulsory education, but the progress has been slow and
regressed since 2006. Trends in gross enrollment rate (GER) and net enrollment rate (NER) in
primary school show deterioration in access to primary school in recent years. GER, after
improving from 84.2 percent in 1990 to 102.9 percent in 2006, declined to 83.3 percent in 2010.
At the same time, not much effort was made to get children to start school on time. The NER
stayed flat at 61.3 percent from 1999 and even decreased slightly to 57.6 percent in 2010.
62. While access to education has been shrinking at the primary level, it has expanded
substantially at the secondary and tertiary levels. Secondary GER almost doubled from 24.3
percent in 1990 to 44 percent in 2010. The territory enrollment rate increased about six fold from
1.9 percent to 11.9 percent, setting Nigeria at a level twice as high as the average African country
(6.8 percent) and comparable with the average South Asian country (15.3 percent). This increase,
however, would need to be balanced with the emphasis on primary education in terms of
enrollment and education outcomes, so to strengthen the country’s skill base and, importantly, to
ensure that the poorest and most disadvantaged children are not left out of primary school while
secondary and tertiary schools are expanded for middle-class children.

iii. Social Welfare
63. Wide spread poverty: In spite of strong economic growth in the last decade, poverty in
Nigeria remains widespread. The poverty headcount declined marginally from 48.4 percent in
125

World Bank, 2006.
The ACCESS program is an IT-Enabled Services Foundational Skills Assessment and Certification Program for
Nigeria that is conducted by Hewitt Associates LLC and sponsored by the World Bank.
127
World Bank, 2011.
126

127

2003-2004 to 46 percent in 2009-2010 (using adult equivalent methodology), but, given the
growth in the population, this implies an increase in the number of Nigerians living in poverty
from 60 to 75 million. Poverty rates vary across and within states. While some parts of the
country, most notably Lagos, are experiencing genuine economic booms that are reducing
poverty, a number of other states are most likely growing at a rate less than that of the
population.
64. Across states, there is also a remarkable stability in poverty levels and trends. Some 6 in 10
states that had the lowest poverty rates in 2004 continued to be among the top 10 lowest poverty
states in 2010. However, as noted above a few states have made substantial progress, in reducing
poverty during the period. As indicated below, Lagos State has the lowest estimated poverty rate
of 22.9 percent, while Jigawa has the highest at 77.5 percent. These numbers confirm the fact
that poverty is particularly concentrated in the Northern part of the country, while the South
West experiences the lowest poverty rates. Average poverty rates for the North East and North
West areas are 59.7 and 58 percent, respectively, while the North Central has an average rate of
48.8. By contrast, average rates in the South West, South East, and South South are 30.6, 39, and
37.6, respectively. By far, the Lagos State made the greatest strides toward poverty reduction
between 2003-2004 and 2009-2010, reducing its estimated poverty rate from 43.8 to 22.9
percent. By contrast, a number of States, particularly in the North, made little or no progress in
reducing their poverty rates over this period.

128

Poverty rates by states, State-level head count per capita poverty measure (percent)
State-level head count per adult equivalent poverty measure (%)

2003‐04

2009‐10

Abia

27.4

30.4

Adamawa

64.2

64.5

Akwa Ibom

38.2

35.5

2003‐04

2009‐10

Katsina

56.9

57.0

Kebbi

78.7

50.4

Kogi

86.8

54.2

Anambra

22.4

30.2

Kwara

82.3

51.8

Bauchi

75.0

65.0

Lagos

57.2

23.0

Bayelsa

27.5

29.9

Nassarawa

46.8

55.5

Benue

45.8

61.4

Niger

42.9

29.0

Borno

41.0

42.7

Ogun

32.9

40.2

Cross‐river

50.6

43.7

Ondo

45.2

40.5

Delta

55.4

42.4

Osun

27.4

23.6

Ebonyi

44.4

71.2

Oyo

21.4

30.5

Edo

36.9

43.5

Plateau

51.2

54.1

Ekiti

43.4

40.2

Rivers

39.9

30.3

Enugu

32.3

47.7

Sokoto

62.8

71.8

Gombe

56.4

73.8

Taraba

44.9

47.7

Imo

29.6

28.4

Yobe

72.1

68.7

Jigawa

87.4

77.4

Zamfara

67.3

50.8

Kaduna

35.8

45.5

FCT Abuja

35.6

31.0

Kano

40.9

56.5

79. Unemployment: Jobs are an important component of poverty reduction, increased
productivity, and social cohesion, and therefore are a cornerstone of development.128 Yet the
pace of growth has so far not delivered significant employment opportunities for the population,
particularly in the North-West, where the unemployment rate was 21.5 percent in 2009,
compared to a low of 8.9 percent in the South-East. Nigeria is grappling with how best to
provide opportunities to its burgeoning young workforce. Youth unemployment is particularly
worrisome (37.7 percent for the age group 15-24 and 22.4 percent for the age group 25-44).129
With persistent high fertility rates of 5.5 births per woman (2010) 130 and 43 percent of the
population below 15 years of age (2010), the projected strong population growth will further
complicate this challenge. Most demographic growth will be in people of working age (15-64),
and Nigeria faces the urgent challenge of absorbing them into productive employment. Failure to
do so could become a major source of social and political instability. These challenges are
complex in nature, but with well-coordinated and multi-sectoral approaches, they could be
transformed into opportunities to capture the demographic dividend through skills enhancement
of young people.
128

WDR, 2012.
Idem.
130
Idem.
129

129

80. Disparities: Wide disparities in terms of gender, geographical boundaries, and
geopolitical zones complicate economic and social development. The country is ranked 79th out
of 86 in the 2012 Social Institutions and Gender Index (OECD), and 120th out of 135 in the 2011
Global Gender Gap Index. Gender gaps are particularly notable in access to education,
household decision making, and political representation. The Nigeria Digest of Education
Statistics (2006-2010) shows 54,434 public primary schools in Nigeria, with an enrollment of
24.4 million, of which females account for 11.1 million (45.5 percent), indicating a gender parity
index of 83.6. The rural North has persistently lower primary completion rates than other
regions, and many children do not even complete primary school until age 18; and its secondary
completion rate of 54 percent is significantly below that of the urban South, at 54 compared to 89
percent. (See para. 62 for analysis of overall education system.) The same regional differences
seen in education are also observed in health outcomes. Maternal mortality in the rural NorthEast is 1,549, more than five times the national average.131 Malnutrition prevalence is highest in
the North-West and North-East regions (35.1 and 34.5 percent, respectively) and lowest in the
South-East and South-South (10.0 and 12.8 percent, respectively). 132 Regional disparities are
also reflected in unemployment. In 2009, unemployment was highest in the North-West (21.5
percent) and lowest in the South-East (8.9 percent). The youth labor force participation rate
(males and females) is highest in the Northern zones, likely because school enrollment rates in
these regions are the lowest in the country and more youths are out of school. The South-West
zone has the lowest youth labor force participation rate, also likely due to the relatively high
school enrollment rates in this zone.
81. Health: Investments in human capital development have not resulted in more inclusive
growth or brought the country closer to reaching the Millennium Development Goals. Despite
large investments in the health sector over the last decade, Nigeria’s health statistics are worse
than the average for African countries. Nigeria has 2 percent of the world’s population but has 10
percent of maternal deaths (545 per 100,000 live births), 10 percent of under-five mortality (157
per 1,000 live births), and 25 percent of the world malaria burden. The country also has 10
percent of the world burden for mother-to child-transmission of HIV. Nigeria lags behind the
SSA average on three key health indicators: the maternal mortality rate is 545 per one hundred
thousand live births (versus the SSA average of 500); the infant mortality rate is 75 per one
thousand live births (versus 65 for SSA); and the under-five mortality rate is 157 per one
thousand live births (versus 104 for SSA). However, the Government has developed an
integrated response under the “Saving One Million Lives” initiative which is very promising.
82. Education: Access to and quality of education remain important impediments to
sustainable growth and equitable development. There is limited access for the poorest, the
quality of education is inferior at all levels, and the enrollment rate in basic and secondary
education is low. Many students, especially in the rural North, delay their completion of primary
school.133 In the North, completion is as low as 24 percent. On average, only 37 percent of
students finish primary school at the official graduation age of 11. A high percentage of students
never finish secondary school. Only 75 percent finish secondary school by age 24, and the
remaining 25 percent never finish. Nationally, only 29 percent of those who start school graduate
131

DFID Gender in Nigeria Report 2012.
Idem.
133
Completion rate is measured as the percentage of the population in the relevant age group who ever attended
school and completed primary school.
132

130

from secondary school at the official age of 17. About 7 million children are not in school. The
total number of illiterate adults, almost 22 million, places Nigeria among only ten countries
worldwide with more than 10 million adult illiterates (15 years and above). Nigeria spends about
5 percent of its GDP on education, which is in line with international benchmarks, but about 80
percent of that spending is allocated to recurrent costs.
83. Water supply and sanitation: Are central to improvements in health in Nigeria, as they
are for improvements in education, urban and rural development, development of industry and
general economic development. Responsibility for water supply is shared between three levels of
Government – federal, state and local. The federal Government is in charge of water resources
management; state Governments have the primary responsibility for urban water supply; and
local Governments together with communities are responsible for rural water supply. The
responsibility for sanitation is not clearly defined. Water supply service quality and cost recovery
are low. Water tariffs are low and many water users do not pay their bills. Service providers thus
rely mostly on occasional subsidies to cover their operating costs. Investments are mainly
financed by foreign donors and fall short of what is needed to achieve a significant increase in
access.
84. The challenges in the sector are huge. Over the last 20 years, access to safe drinking water
increased by only 10 percent, from 48 percent of the population in 1990 to 58 percent in 2010.134
During the same period, the share of those with access to improved sanitation actually declined
by about 15 percent, from 37 to 31 percent. The sector has been weakened by poor operation and
maintenance, inept institutions, poor tracking of budgeted funds and expenditures, insufficient
technical capacity, lack of coordination across different levels of Government, and lack of intersectoral coordination. These failures have dramatic consequences for lives, livelihoods, and
development.
85. Social protection: The challenges of poverty and unemployment have highlighted the
need to assess the effectiveness of the current approach to social protection. Public expenditure
on social services and assistance programs has increased but is still insufficient. According to the
annual reports of the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), federal Government spending on social
programs (including education and health but excluding pensions and other related transfers)
rose from about 1.4 percent of GDP in 2004 to almost 2 percent in 2009. Social expenditures at
the state level were significantly higher ‒ 2.9 percent of GDP in 2008. Combined social spending
by the federal and state Governments increased between 2004 and 2008 to almost 5 percent of
GDP, which is still quite low compared with other countries.135
86. Over the last few decades, the Government has developed an array of social safety net and
labor programs, but they are poorly targeted, have limited coverage, are not evaluated
periodically, and are generally insufficiently funded. The conditional cash transfer (CCT) program
that was introduced as part of the National Poverty Eradication Program (NAPEP) is the first major
social safety net that is targeted and well-resourced at both the federal and state levels. The
Government of Nigeria has shown an interest in CCT interventions as a way to reduce both shortterm and long-term poverty, especially where effective supply-side interventions are in place. The
Government’s interest in this approach was prompted by the fact that it combines the transfer of

134
135

WDR, 2012.
Youth Employment and Social Support Operation, World Bank. 2012

131

resources to the poorest households with incentives to increase investments in human capital,
which is relevant to the nature of poverty and vulnerability in Nigeria.

iv. Climate Change
Challenges

and

Environmental

Degradation

87. Nigeria is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts. The 2012 flood was the worst in a
century. Preliminary estimates from the Post Disaster Needs Assessment suggest that the damage
and losses are the worst in Nigeria’s history. Nigeria’s disaster profile is characterized by
extreme hydro-meteorological events which will likely increase in frequency and magnitude due
to climate change. Neither Nigeria’s monitoring and early warning systems nor its response
mechanisms are well developed.
88. The cost of ongoing environmental degradation and associated disasters is likely to
increase under a business-as-usual scenario. Nationwide, cropland degradation accounts for
between 1.7 and 6.4 percent of GDP.136 Land degradation is accelerating in the South-East and
land degradation and environmental insecurity are also accelerating in the arid and semi-arid
North. High population growth and poverty levels, resource depletion, rainfall variability,
recurrent droughts and floods, soil infertility and erosion, and deforestation threaten the 80
percent of Northern Nigerians who depend on land and water resources for their economic and
physical security. Nigeria’s woody savannah systems are also under stress from clearing and
reduced rainfall.
89. Environmental pollution and governance, including enhanced transparency in
environmental decision making; management of natural resource rents; and environmental
assessment and management; as well as waste and chemicals management is central to the
environmental sustainability and the actualization of the Government’s Transformation Agenda.
In general three major sources of pollution can be identified in Nigeria. They include (i)
industrial waste including massive oil spills have continued for decades and compromised
important mangrove and inland wetlands and fisheries in the Niger delta, (ii) domestic/municipal
waste, (iii) radioactive/hazardous waste and e-waste, as Nigeria hosts numerous disposal sites.
90. As Nigeria works toward becoming one of the top 20 world economies by 2020, air
pollution could also become an issue. Achieving that goal might entail a doubling by 2035 of
emissions compared to current levels; and throughout the period, cumulative emissions might
add up to some 11.6 billion tons of CO2—five times the estimated historical emissions over
1900-2005.
91. Nigeria already has several policies and strategic initiatives which if properly implemented
can serve as adaptive as well as mitigating climate change measures. Thus, the country has many
options to grow its economy with full respect for the ecological integrity of the country.137 The
national benefits of the low-carbon strategy include cheaper and more diversified provision of
electricity (with total savings up to 2035 on the order of 7 percent, or US$12 billion); more
efficient operations in the oil/gas industry (with discounted net benefits on the order of US$7.5
billion); more climate resilient and more productive agriculture (with net additional benefits to
136

Nigeria Erosion and Watershed management project, World Bank, 2011.
Nigeria Climate Change Resilience and Nigeria Low Carbon Growth Policy Note, World Bank reports,
forthcoming.

137

132

farmers on the order of 0.2 percent of GDP); and better transport services (resulting in economies
of fuel, better air quality, reduced congestion). Over 25 years, the emission of some 2.4 billion
tons of CO2e could be avoided, while at the same time reaping domestic benefits.
92. Building a climate resilient society within a low-carbon/high growth economic
development framework will (a) integrated and comprehensive disaster risk management, (b)
climate-responsive infrastructure development, (c) appropriate research and development, (vi)
capacity building, institutional strengthening and governance, and (d) sustainable and
coordinated climate change financing.

D. CAF FRAMEWORK AND FOCUS
79. The CAF framework combines the growth and job agenda, to support the Government to
establish a platform for strong, sustained, socially and regionally inclusive growth.

a. Fundamentals
80. Macroeconomic stability, an enabling business environment, investments in human capital,
the rule of law, and respect for property and personal rights are essential for growth and job
creation. Finance, infrastructure, and business regulations set the quality of the investment
climate and thus influence investment prospects and job creation by private firms. While good
outcomes in nutrition, health, and education are development goals in themselves, they are also
important from the growth and jobs perspective, because they equip people for productive
employment. Rule of law and respect for rights are critical to give the private sector the
confidence to invest and operate. In Nigeria and other countries that need to manage resource133

related risks, fundamentals also include efficient, accountable, and transparent public sector
management, i.e., good governance.

i. Economic Management
81. In support of sound macroeconomic management, the CAF partners will (a) provide the
Government with financial support and offer regular analytical and policy advice aimed at
improving budget and public financial management, deepening financial systems, ensuring debt
sustainability, and enhancing the capacity for collecting and analyzing statistics. The partners
will also support (b) a range of core diagnostic work to improve fiscal sustainability, including
public expenditure reviews, fiduciary assessments, and expenditure tracking studies; (c) activities
to increase mobilization of domestic revenues, reform utilities and enhance public service
performance, and improve the selectivity and effectiveness of public investment; (d) provide
analytical support on a range of issues associated with growth and its distributional aspect.

ii. Improved Enabling Environment
82. Nigeria lacks the operating environment that businesses need to take full advantage of the
many economic opportunities in the country. The most pressing constraints are infrastructure and
financing. Accordingly, CAF support will focus on reducing infrastructure constraints to
economic diversification and job creation; and on fostering the financial sector’s role in
development.
83. Power sector: To improve the capacity and reliability of its generation, transmission, and
distribution systems, Nigeria needs to: (a) ensure that the policy and reform agenda continues to
move forward; (b) institute cost-reflective tariffs and appropriate commercial practices; (c)
increase transparency in Government investment decisions, sector subsidies, and award of power
purchase agreements (PPAs); (d) improve accountability by private operators, GENCO/DISCO
management, and sector staff; and (e) develop the “Sustainable Energy for All” (SE4all) agenda
for rapid expansion of electricity access, and related analytical data and reports. CAF support
will also strengthen the Government’s capacity to develop sound technical and analytical reports
for the sector, to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of future investments in service
expansion. These analytical products will include: (a) a power demand forecast; (b) a least-cost
generation and transmission system expansion plan; (c) a detailed rural access expansion plan for
each state; (d) viable pilots for sustainable off-grid provision of electricity and other energy
services for cooking and productive uses; and (e) investment-ready feasibility and scoping
studies for alternative and renewable energy generating options. The partners will provide
analytical and advisory activities in support of prioritizing sector investments in a context of
limited financial resources. The CAF will also assist the Government in covering the payment
risk of the Nigeria Bulk Electricity Trading Co. as it enters into PPAs with independent power
producers (IPPs); and support to Nigeria Bulk Electricity Trading Co. to establish a culture of
excellence and transparency to give investors the confidence to develop cost-efficient electricity
generation projects.
84. Transportation: In the transportation sector, priority will be given to creating
infrastructure that improves connections to markets. A spatial knowledge platform will be
developed to support: (a) coordination of ongoing activities; (b) geographically focused
interventions; (c) prioritizing and sequencing of future investments in support of value chain
134

development; and (d) identification of future investments. Partners will promote an integrated
and strategic approach to infrastructure planning, financing, operation and maintenance, and
collaborate with the National Planning Commission to develop the Nigeria Integrated
Infrastructure Master Plan. Other strategic priorities include strengthening institutions, ensuring
the sustainability of assets, enhancing accountability, and building capacities among the various
state and federal agencies. The partners will also look for opportunities to support projects aimed
at increasing the integration of poorer-performing states and at shifting to more efficient modes
of transport.
85. Access to finance: Lack of access to finance appears to be a barrier in particular for small
business, which generally contributes significantly to the GDP of African economies. The easing
barriers to access to finance to small business could significantly reduce bottlenecks to
employment growth. The CAF partners will provide advisory and analytical support for fostering
the financial sector’s role in development, including regarding infrastructure and SMEs
financing.

iii. Human Capital
86. As a country with a population of 162 million, Nigeria has tremendous human potential,
which can be a source of immense creativity and innovation. To take full advantage of this
demographic dividend and unlock human capital potential of all its people, Nigeria needs to
overcome daunting challenges across a range of sectors, including education, social protection,
skills development, and health and nutrition. Poor access to water and sanitation puts a
particularly heavy burden on women and children, who spend a good portion of each day
securing sufficient water for the households.
87. Health outcomes: Nigeria’s weak health outcomes undermine its competitiveness. The
CAF partners are committed to supporting the Government’s Saving One Million Lives (SOML)
initiative, which aims to strengthen the policy framework and systems aimed at improving
nutrition. CAF support will focus on developing (a) an enabling environment for private health
insurance; and (b) robust performance management and data tracking systems for health service
delivery (The same types of systems will be used to track education service delivery.) Analytical
work will focus on constraints and challenges that the poor and vulnerable face in accessing
welfare-enhancing services. The results will help inform the support of CAF partners to all levels
of Government to scale up innovative and successful targeting mechanisms and tools to ensure
equity in social services delivery and utilization. Additionally, the CAF will support annual
reviews of the effectiveness of MDG-related expenditures, as well as studies to investigate
constraints and propose solutions for overcoming them.
88. CAF support will also aim to improve the lives of women by (a) improving the quality of
maternal health services; (b) facilitating access to credit and land for women in agriculture, and
access to credit and skills training for women entrepreneurs; (c) improving and strengthening
legal rights and protections for women; and (d) piloting and mainstreaming gender in
development programs.
89. Skills: A skilled and productive labor force is critical for Nigeria to achieve its Vision
20:2020 goals. The CAF partners will support the Government in (a) addressing weaknesses in
the primary education, including improving reading and numeracy skills, (b) making technical
and vocational education more relevant to the needs of the economy; (c) improving the quality of
135

educational outcomes; and (d) increasing cooperation with the private sector and nonGovernmental organizations. The partners will also support Nigeria’s efforts to bolster its
knowledge economy through enhanced science and technological research and teaching.
Analytical work will include a diagnostic on the large segment of Nigeria youth with limited
basic skills or without secondary or tertiary education. Assistance for implementing reforms and
developing the technical education and training sector will focus on priority sectors and the
North. In addition, the CAF partners will support results-based pilots to increase access to and
quality of education, including public-private partnerships in the education sector. The CAF
support will also focus on livelihood projects at the state and Federal levels, providing skills
training for rural youth and connecting young people to jobs or entrepreneurship opportunities
through innovative approaches.
90. Water and sanitation: The CAF partners will assist the Government in developing (a)
country-wide baseline to track Nigeria’s progress towards meeting the water-related MDGs; (b)
measurable service standards for State Water Boards; and (c) an integrated approach to
improving water supply delivery (quality and coverage), and ensuring that water and sanitation
services are sustainable, cost effective, and affordable to the poor. This shift in approach aims to
transform the incentive structure and overall performance of the sector.
91. The CAF partners stand ready to continue partnering with Nigeria to address the huge
challenges facing the sector, with a focus on reforms to improve governance and service
delivery. The focus will be on developing and implementing a common results-based approach
to providing financing to States, based on their commitment to reform and improved
performance. Some states have already initiated various reforms to improve performance with
respect to water supply and sanitation services.

iv. Governance
92. The strategy to promote stronger capacity for governance and good governance will focus
on dialogue with the Government and assistance to build capacity of key institutions. The CAF
partners regard strengthened public financial management and reduced corruption as critical for
development. Support will be provided to strengthening public financial management systems at
all levels of Government, deepening the engagement with the Government on civil service
reform, and to basing planning on accurate and timely management of data and sound human
resources management. Continued support to civil society will be critical to strengthen the
demand side for effective, accountable and transparent public sector management.
93. The CAF will also aim to support further consolidation of democracy, strengthening the
rule of law, and oversight institutions. In this context, the CAF partners will endeavor to
strengthen and deepen their understanding of the politics of reform in the country and of the
complex structure of its governance challenges to better inform their intervention models.
Recognizing the complexity of this reform area, partners will also work on deepening the
understanding budgetary flows at different levels of Government. The engagement will include
pilot engagements at different levels of the policy reform chain to assess the most effective entry
points including efforts at the policy and project levels with Government stakeholders as well as
non-state actors.

136

b.

Strategic Directions

94. Product and market diversification and job creation are critically important for Nigeria’s
sustained growth and continued progress toward the MDGs.

i. Promote Product Diversification in the Non-oil Sector
95. Experience has shown that incomes in a country tend to converge to the level dictated by
the complexity of their productive structures. This indicates the importance of creating the
conditions that would allow complexity and innovation to emerge. 138 In Nigeria, this means
expanding and multiplying value chains in the non-oil sector. Results from other countries
suggest that innovative products and new value chains can be created either by combining
existing capabilities in new ways; or acquiring critical new capabilities, often through foreign
investment, and combining them with existing capabilities.139 As shown by the case of Chile,
Government initiatives can play a critical role in this process.

ii. Integrate Markets Domestically and Regionally
96. Increasing domestic, regional, and global market integration can help to drive product
diversification and job creation, and significantly boost Nigeria’s efforts to achieve non-oil
growth. Better domestic integration would contribute to more balanced growth among Nigeria’s
states, helping weaker performing states to converge more quickly with the better performers.
This will require the removal of policy and regulatory barriers across states. The CAF partners
will continue to engage with the Government on the increased integration of domestic markets,
as well as on issues related to regional and global integration.
97. As noted above, one of the key challenges to improving market connections in Nigeria is
the large infrastructure deficit. A suggested way forward is to use the proposed spatial planning
platform to align infrastructure investment with programs in strategic sectors of the economy.
For example, rural accessibility remains a serious problem in Nigeria, with major repercussions
for agricultural and rural development; and better alignment of rural road projects with
agricultural development priorities would increase rural access and regional connectivity, with
positive spillover effect on product diversification and job creation.
98. The CAF partners will seek to establish the spatial analysis platform in order to provide the
Government with a better understanding of the geographical distribution of economic resources
and their uses, markets and access to them, and how infrastructure services link and affect both.
According to this multi-sectoral approach, infrastructure is viewed as a shared input to a range of
downstream economic sectors (such as agriculture, mining, tourism, industry, manufacturing and
services) and its simultaneous impact on the output of each of these sectors is explicitly taken
into account. With limited fiscal space for public investment in infrastructure, the use of this
platform to enhance selectivity and efficiency would also help to strengthen public service
management and accountability. According to the Public Investment Management Index (PMI)

138

C.A. Hidalgo and R. Hausmann: The
http://www.pnas.org/content/106/26/10570.full.
139
Idem.

Building

137

Blocks

of

Economic

Complexity

(2009),

developed by the International Monetary Fund, Nigeria now ranks in the bottom third – 52nd out
of 71 surveyed countries.140
99. Market integration also depends on reform and standardization of the procurement system
at the national and state levels. Uniform rules, procedures, and incentives are critical for an
efficient and fair public procurement system. The CAF partners will continue supporting the
authorities in developing procurement-related legislation and capacities, including management
information systems; and will facilitate knowledge sharing and networking among public
procurement institutions in Nigeria.

iii. Enhance the private sector’s developmental role and
stimulate entrepreneurship
100. The private sector is the main engine of job creation and the source of nearly nine out of
ten jobs in the world. 141 Accordingly, Nigeria’s job creation strategy needs to be embedded
within the broader strategy, as articulated in the Transformation Agenda, to promote private
sector growth and entrepreneurship. However, the existing legal framework suffers from poor
enforcement. In addition, there is ineffective coordination among ministries regulating the
private sector and between the Government and the private sector; and many ministries have
limited capacity to implement reforms. Despite those challenges, Nigeria has significant private
sector potential, with investment opportunities in the telecommunications, construction,
agribusiness, and tourism sectors. If these opportunities are realized, they will provide substantial
sources of job creation and diversified growth.
101. Private sector involvement is also essential for strengthening the country’s skills base and
identifying gaps. Further, the projected strong population growth and lack of capacity in the
public education system is likely to increase the importance of the private sector in the delivery
of education and training services, particularly for the large number of people with low or no
skills which are beyond school age.
102. A stronger technological base is key to strong and sustained non-oil growth. Since
commercial markets are the primary vehicles for technology transfer, these activities need to be
in line with country development goals. A Government-supported technology transfer program
could provide incentives and vehicles for domestic businesses acquire or develop innovative
technologies. The success of such a program, however, will depend on a stronger intellectual
property rights regime. Historically, businesses have been reluctant to engage in markets that
lack adequate protection of property rights. The CAF partners will provide support the
authorities to improve the enabling environment for technological transfer and innovation, giving
priority to sectors with strong multiplier effects.
103. Nigeria’s informal economy has been estimated to account for as much as 58 percent of
GNP,142 and because it is so large it has significant potential for business and job creation. Small
enterprises and entrepreneurs may not be interested in formalizing, due to limited capacity or
140

The PMI measures the performance of public investment management in four areas – appraisal, selection,
implementation, and evaluation. Nigeria fared particularly badly on selection and evaluation categories. The main
project selection criteria are integration with the budget, legislative scrutiny, and public scrutiny. The main elements
of the evaluation criteria are evaluation, audit, and assets management.
141
WDR on Jobs (World Bank, 2012); Africa at work: Job creation and inclusive growth” (McKinsey, 2012).
142
Schneider, 2002. The exact size of the informal economy is difficult to measure due to the scarcity of data.

138

risks associated with the transfer to the formal sector,143 but they often spread their risks and
wealth by expanding horizontally. The CAF will support analytical work aimed at building a
knowledge platform for sharing and scaling up successful entrepreneurial practices in the
informal sector.

c.

Approach

104. Targeting: High unemployment and the need to diversify the economy have led the
Government to target sectors with large multiplier effects and job creation potential, such as
housing and agriculture. This approach reflects the increasing recognition that some form of
vertical policy is probably inevitable for resource-rich countries seeking to diversify, since
market forces alone will tend to pull the country back toward resource dependence.
Paradoxically, this resource wealth also makes it easier to support diversification efforts, since it
gives Governments the means to finance public investments that can bring down the costs of
production for non-resource traded sectors.144 This vertical/targeted approach is therefore also
important for job creation.145
105. In the housing sector, the CAF will support the development of long-term housing finance,
the lack of which has been a major barrier to the growth of the housing market. Other obstacles
include difficulties with property registration, titling, and the cost and time involved in
foreclosure. The opaque land allocation and city planning processes are further sources of
insecurity to households, leading to informal practices in land transactions or related
investments. A legal framework for foreclosure exists; however, its implementation is not
sufficiently clear and encourages informal practice. The housing sector also suffers from high
construction costs, which limits the development of affordable housing. The CAF will support a
coordinated approach to all parts of the value chain, with a focus on (a) land and legal
framework, (b) access to housing finance, and (c) housing development.
106. CAF support will also aim to enhance understanding of Nigeria’s urbanization challenges,
and provide a platform to engaging with the Government to address those challenges. Financial,
analytical, and advisory support will be provided for (a) strengthening of urban management,
infrastructure, and service delivery systems across the urban hierarchy; (b) in situ slum
upgrading; and (c) selective developments in metropolitan areas. A spatial knowledge platform
will be constructed to support the coordination of ongoing activities, focus geographically
planned interventions, and identify and prioritize future investments.
107. In the agriculture sector, the CAF will engage across the following operational areas: (a)
inclusive agricultural and rural growth; (b) technologies for increased productivity and climate
resilience; (c) nutrition security; (d) agricultural markets; and (e) water and natural resources
management. Engagement will be underpinned by financial and analytical work. The overall
emphasis will be on innovation, and on addressing constraints to the development of selected
value chains, strengthening systems, and supporting collective action (especially among women)
to facilitate access to better economic opportunities.

143

Radwan I, Pellegrini J: Knowledge, Productivity, and Innovation in Nigeria: Creating a New Economy, World
Bank, 2010.
144
A. Gelb, Economic Diversification in Resource Rich Countries, 2010.
145
WDR, 2012.

139

108. Understand the challenges: CAF support will focus on removing blockages that have
prevented targeted sectors from reaching their potential. The effectiveness of this approach will
depend on an in-depth understanding of political economy dynamics in a country that is (a)
primarily agrarian but rapidly urbanizing; (b) rich in resources but with large regional disparities;
(c) facing security challenges, including high youth unemployment. It will be important, for
example, to understand how job creation challenges in Nigeria’s rural areas vary from those in
growing cities, or in the manufacturing sectors. Moreover, security challenges, high
unemployment, and poverty in the North may dictate that higher priority be given to laborintensive sectors than to those with high growth potential.
109. Tensions created by Nigeria’s regional disparities highlight the need for geographically
broad-based and inclusive development, and for improving access to and quality of public
services in both urban and rural areas. The CAF will seek to strengthen the focus on the Northern
states by developing a comprehensive understanding of:


the condition of and policies regarding semi-arid and arid lands, and the capacities
of institutions responsible for land and water management in the region;



barriers to better performance in the education and health sectors; and



the precise nature of the challenges to economic diversification and job creation in
the region.

110. The findings from this analytical work will provide a platform for engaging with the
Government on designing an integrated approach to growth and job creation in the North. They
will also inform the ongoing and planned CAF-supported projects in the region.
111. Reduce vulnerabilities: For a country to respond effectively to shocks and protect its
vulnerable citizens, it needs a coherent social safety net system. To date, Nigeria does not have a
broad-based social protection system and policy. Developing an effective social safety net
system with interventions focused on youth employment and empowerment and demand-side
support for human capital development as the starting point would help in increasing
opportunities for the poor and increasing household resilience to shocks.
112. Nigeria is increasingly aware of its vulnerability to climate change risks, as demonstrated
by the recent floods. The CAF will assist the Government and other stakeholders in also
recognizing the risks associated with environmental and natural resource degradation, and in
developing strategies, governance arrangements, monitoring and early warning systems, and
response mechanisms for natural hazards.
113. To reduce the vulnerabilities of the rural population, the partners will assist national and
state authorities in implementing rural-livelihood projects to promote inclusive growth, building
on existing support for community-driven development initiatives. The three-pronged approach
will aim at (a) improving existing livelihoods, by working with farmers to diversify products,
lower production costs, and identify stable markets for their goods; (b) identifying selfemployment opportunities and providing technical assistance for business development; and (c)
developing skills that are better matched to the needs of the market.
114. Monitor for Results: The successful implementation of the diversification and job
creation drive requires the involvement of all relevant stakeholders. It is thus imperative that
there is a sustained effective process that links the implementing agents and provides due public
140

awareness of the strategy and priorities. The strategy, in turn, will only be a success if it can be
implemented effectively and timeously, hence the critical importance of ensuring that programs
are held accountable against measurable and transparent milestones.

E. CAF PRINCIPLES AND MODALITY OF ENGAGEMENT
115. Principles: The CAF is centered on three principles, which are consistent with those
articulated in the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. These are:


Supporting implementation of the country-owned strategy to achieve the MDGs and
other developmental goals.



Collaborating more effectively, both among development partners and with the Government.



Focusing on results and outcomes (including managing resources and improving
decision-making for results, and strengthening systems for monitoring and evaluation).

116. The CAF partners will build on progress made in harmonizing development assistance in
Nigeria. The partners will strive to increasingly (i) use common arrangements to deliver aid, (ii)
harmonize programming and policy dialogue, and to rationalize engagement in sectors, choice of
aid instruments, and advisory capacity. They will seek to achieve greater harmonization at sector
level, including through aligning partners’ support with sector priorities agreed with the
Government and complementing support provided by other partners.
117. The key element that will guide this work is a country-based approach that emphasizes
country ownership and Government leadership, includes capacity building, recognizes diverse
aid modalities, and engages non-Governmental stakeholders, including civil society and the
private sector.
118. The partners will seek to support the Government in leading the overall consultative
institutions, including organizing and chairing consultative groups, high-level meetings, working
groups and similar arrangements, and providing the secretariat. This requires adequate staffing,
resources and appropriate location within the Government structure. Where necessary, the CAF
partners will seek support the co-ordination process financially and technically.
119. The CAF assistance will comprise financial and analytical and advisory support. The
partners will finance the implementation of the CAF through four main channels: budget and
project support to the Government, support to the programs of civil society organizations,
assistance to the private sector, and support channeled through U.N. agencies. The financing
support will be complemented with analytical work and policy dialogue to build institutions and
strengthen capacity in key areas and to provide the foundation for future support.
120. The CAF is flexible; partners will adapt their level and nature of support in response to
emerging national developments and needs, as feasible. Adjustments will be made in
consultation with the Government and with other partners. The annual CAF review process will
provide the opportunity for identifying and agreeing any changes.
121. The CAF builds on Nigeria’s recent achievements, but also incorporates lessons learnt
from the partner’s engagement in the country, to develop transformational and innovative
solutions to tackle Nigeria’s most pressing challenges. In particular, the CAF will:

141



Focus on catalytic interventions which are innovative in design and approach and,
scaled up with Government resources, would provide additional benefits that could
far exceed their initial direct impact;



Enhance the synergy between state and national interventions and facilitate a mutual
dialogue of different levels of Government around results;



Enhance the role of knowledge partnerships in building capacity at state level,
supporting the federal Government in furthering its reform agenda, and developing
platforms for engagement with the Government in new areas such as job creation,
socio-economic development in the North, civil service reform and urbanization;



Promote an integrated approach to providing solutions/support, applying value chain
approach where appropriate, and using the spatial analysis as one of the platforms for
improving selectivity;



Leverage collaboration among partners to intensify support in selected areas with a
view of accelerating the delivery of results.

122. CAF engagement at the state level is based on the recognition of marked regional
disparities in Nigeria. The CAF supports dynamic and reformist states and the scaling up of their
emerging good practices, while also strengthening the capacity of weaker states to address their
development challenges. The CAF partners will seek to support the States Governors Forum as a
state-level platform for (a) dissemination of knowledge and experience; and (b) provision of
flexible support to strengthen the capacity of state-level systems to meet common norms and
standards.
123. Modalities: In order to achieve the above objectives, the partners plan to follow some key
practical modalities as follows:


Organize discussions on a selected number of priority sectors/themes (to be agreed
upon with Government) through donor sector groups. A proposed list will be
provided. Each group will be chaired (facilitated) by a partner who will take the
leadership in facilitating periodic meetings, be the spoke person to represent partners
in discussions with Governments and other stakeholders. TORs for the group will be
reviewed and validated.



Use common implementation mechanisms as much as possible and leverage our
instruments to maximize aid effectiveness in Nigeria.



Use the Governors Forum as a platform to organize strategic discussions with state
and facilitate dissemination of knowledge and share experiences across states.



Develop a common approach to engage with states.



Use the development database to facilitate maintaining up to date information on aid
in Nigeria and its recording in the Government budget, and



Develop a strategic platform for high level policy discussions with the Government. It
will aim at meeting twice a year on strategic issues.

142

F. RISKS AND RISK MITIGATION STRATEGIES
124. There are several risks to the CAF implementation, including in-country violence and
insecurity, a politically fluid situation leading to the 2015 elections, vested interests, regional
instability, as well as economic volatility related to the fluctuation of oil prices. The CAF aims to
be candid about identified risks and their impact - direct or indirect - on its implementation.
125. The most important risk pertains to the security which remains challenging. The continuing
incidents of terrorist activities and other acts of violence in the North and of kidnapping across
the country could hinder achievement of national and sub-national development objectives.
Tension, infighting, and conflict could become more pronounced as the 2015 election
approaches, making reform increasingly difficult to accomplish. Another external shock that may
impact Nigeria is the risk of spillover from Mali which could jeopardize the whole region.
Bilateral partners will seek to support the Government’s efforts to reduce incidents of terrorist
activities. The CAF partners will maintain dialogue with the Government on development of the
North region, and provide non-lending and lending support to that end. The partners will seek to
strengthen civil society organizations to deliver services and to increase their engagement in
monitoring the rule of law and respect of rights. Should regional instability spill over to Nigeria,
creating implementation difficulties for the CAF implementation, necessary adjustments to the
program will be made in consultation with the Government.
126. The volatile security situation is making supervision of projects challenging. To mitigate
these risks, the CAF partners will seek to provide training and to undertake risk-based
supervision missions as possible to help build capacity and ensure that adequate controls are in
place for financial transactions and accuracy in financial reporting, audit and disbursement. The
partners will establish an information sharing mechanism regarding their respective portfolio risk
assessments and risk mitigation practices and experiences.
127. Under the above circumstances, it is important for the CAF partners to focus on what is
possible, help sustain momentum within the Government’s economic development program, and
build support for reforms across all parts of the coalition Government as well as with civil
society and the private sector. Given the volatility of the security environment and the upcoming
elections, the CAF will remain flexible and will strategically adapt its engagement to respond to
the evolving situation on the ground.
128. With its largely oil-based economy, Nigeria is vulnerable to oil price fluctuations. While
the risk of a major domestic crisis in Nigeria is not substantial, the implications of the global
economic developments on Nigeria’s growth will need to be monitored closely. The need for a
flexible approach that allows the partners to respond dynamically to such exogenous risks will be
a hallmark of this CAF. The CAF partners will continue to make policy recommendations and
support prudent macroeconomic management by the Government. Prudent macroeconomic
management will remain the key to providing the fiscal space for the Government to adjust
appropriately to external shocks when they occur.
129. A lack of incentives for performance and poor coordination between Government agencies
and across different levels of Government may slow down the reform implementation as well as
undermine the success of the CAF assistance. The partners will seek to mitigate this risk through
advocacy program for civil service reform and targeting their capacity building support to key
program areas.
143

130. Gaps in capacity, especially at subnational level, and institutional weaknesses continue to
pose challenges to the successful implementation of the partners’ programs. The increasingly
transformative nature of programs, pushing the boundaries of the public sector expertise and
hence having to deal with systemic issues such as institutional weaknesses and a lack of a
systematic approach to monitoring and evaluation, contract and project management, or asset
management poses many challenges to the CAF implementation. Continued attention is needed
to support implementation of institutional reforms, adequate staffing, strengthening regulatory
frameworks, and institutionalization of practices and systems for better project management.
New projects will seek to address this concern through focused technical assistance, but
increased efforts are needed to build capacity in local agencies to ensure longer-term
sustainability of ongoing projects. Better collection of data is critical to effective and evidencebased monitoring and evaluation, and in turn helps strengthen the focus on results. The CAF
partners will also seek to pilot a governance filter to better identify ownership, capacity and
institutional constraints and to systematically ensure that Government resources and policies are
leveraged for development impact.
131. The lack of clarity by the CAF partners regarding the preparation of the external borrowing
plan and delays in its approval impacts the CAF implementation (Annex 1). The partners will
engage with the Government on how best to align their respective annual assistance cycle with
the Government’s processes and practices for external borrowing and regarding how to manage
risks that delays in the Government approval of the borrowing plan create for partners’ own
planning and programming cycle.
132. Finally, the period leading to the elections will certainly reduce the momentum for major
policy reforms as policy makers enter in electoral campaign. Again, partners will need to share
views and harmonize ways to handle the dialogue during this period. Our counterparts are clearly
indicating that 2013 is the year where most reforms can be implemented. It is therefore a window
of opportunity that we must use collectively.

144

Annex 1: GOVERNMENT’S PROCESS FOR HANDLING EXTERNAL FINANCING OF PROJECTS
Introduction: External Financing of projects in Nigeria is coordinated by two main interlocutors of Government: International
Economic Relations Department (IERD) and National Planning Commission (NPC). The IERD in the Federal Ministry of Finance is
responsible for articulating the external funding needs and requests of the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and state
Governments based on the guidelines on foreign borrowing and the requirements in the National Implementation Plan (NIP).
The International Cooperation Department (IC) in the National Planning Commission is responsible for the negotiation,
coordination and monitoring of grants and other bilateral flows must sign on any bilateral Agreement as the National Authorization
Officer (NAO) before such funds can be utilized. This matrix below presents the new guidelines provided by the Federal Executive
Council (FEC) and Council of States (approved in 2001) which specified the terms and conditions under which foreign loans could be
contracted.
MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS &
AGENCY
STEP Federal Ministry of Finance
1

RESPONSIBILITY

REMARK

Management and control of all finances of the FGN as
prescribed by the constitution

STEP
2

International Economic
Relations (IERD

STEP
3
STEP
4

Constituencies under IERD:
IDA, IBRD, IFAD, IFC,
MIGA, Islamic Development
Bank, IMF etc.
International Cooperation
Department (IC)

Responsible for the articulation of the borrowing
policies, especially such as capital-related borrowing
projects
Responsible for funding and supervision of projects.

It is also responsible for managing,
controlling, and monitoring revenues and
expenditures of the country.
The external borrowing program of the
FGN is housed in the IERD

STEP
5

Debt Management Office
(DMO)

Responsible for the negotiation, coordination,
monitoring of grants and other bilateral flows.
The DMO advises the FGN on the financing gap for the
succeeding financial year and the amounts to be
borrowed for bridging the gap both internally and
145

This agency must sign off on any bilateral
agreement as the national Authorization
Officer (NAO) before such funds can be
utilized.
It monitors the degree to which the country

STEP
6
STEP
7

National Assembly

STEP
8

House of Representatives
National Assembly only
deliberates on external
funding for specific projects
brought to it by the Senate the
Executive.

IERD

STEP
9

FEC

STEP

Appraisal

externally.
All external borrowing proposals of the FG, etc. for the
next succeeding year are submitted not later than 30th
August of each year to the Honorable Minister of
Finance for vetting and incorporation into the public
sector external borrowing program for the following
year.
The National Assembly (NA) receives the final project
for ratification after Board Decision only to ratify.
IERD includes the project detail in the Borrowing plan
and submit to the Honorable Minister of Finance for
delivery to the President.

House Committee on External Loans invites
representatives of Fed/State Governments, agencies and
Parastatals to the House Hearing to defend their
submissions and thereafter submits its recommendations
to the Senate
The Senate Committee on External Borrowing invites
representatives of Fed, state Governments, Local
Governments and parastatals to the Hearing and
thereafter delivers its submission to the President for
Signature. The President in turn sends the package to
the Honorable Minister of Finance.
FEC receives the approved borrowing plan from the
Honorable Minister of Finance for review and a memo
is raised on the extract from the minutes of the FEC
meeting and it is submitted to the Ministry of Justice for
legal opinion.
Before a project is appraised, it is discussed at an inter146

is exposed to foreign financing. Federal,
states and local Governments or any of
their agencies shall not obtain any external
loan except with a guarantee issued by the
minister.

All external borrowing of the government
and their agencies for the next fiscal year
must be submitted not later than 90 days
preceding that year to the Minister of
Finance for incorporation into the public
sector external borrowing program for the
coming year.
Committee can only receive questions
relating to the content of the borrowing
plan
Representatives of the Federal, State
Governments, Local Governments and
parastatals are further required to defend
their submissions. Sometime, a template
may be given to guide them on the relevant
issues with FMoF.

Based on the outcome, a borrowing intent

10

STEP
11

Negotiations

STEP
12
STEP
13

Board Approval

STEP
14

WB proposes a date for
signing of the Financing
Agreement.

STEP
15
STEP
16
STEP
17
STEP
18

Ministry of Justice

Participating States execute
Subsidiary Loan Agreement
with the FMoF.
Legal Opinion of the Attorney
General of the Federation and
Minister of Justice (AG).
Effectiveness

ministerial meeting which includes FMF represented by
IERD, the relevant MDA responsible for that sector,
DMO. CME reviews the intent alongside the borrowing
envelope for the year as well as shown in the fiscal
framework. At appraisal, the borrowing envelope for
that project as endorsed by the Honorable Minister of
Finance is then used to prepare project details.
TTL sends notice of invitation to the Recipient.

is sent to the Honorable Minister of
Finance by the Minister for that sector.

The Ministry of Justice comes on board at
Negotiations while the NA gets on stage
after the Project Appraisal and
negotiations.

The CD sends package to RVP for onward delivery for
Board Approval.
A memo is raised on the Extract from the FEC meeting
and it is submitted to the Federal Ministry of Justice for
a Legal Opinion or clearance.
Advance copies of Financing Agreement is delivered to
the Director, Legal Services, FMoF.
Financing Agreement is signed between the Bank and
the FGN.
FMoF arrange with participating states for the execution
of the subsidiary agreement.

Country lawyers clears subsidiary
agreement
Country lawyers clears subsidiary
agreement

The AG provides his legal opinion on the Subsidiary
Agreement and the Financing Agreement.

FMoF through IERD formally deliver the
Legal Opinion to the WB.

Country Director declares project effective.

Implementation begins.

147

Annex 2. Total Donor Commitments as of end-December 2012

148

Annex 3. Distribution of Donor Funds Per Sector

Total Partner Funds per Sector

Agriculture
10%

Human Development
26%
(Education: 5%
Health: 19%
Social Protection: 2%)

Water &
Sanitation
14%

Infrastructure
28%
(Energy & Power: 9%
Transport: 14%
Urban: 2%
Others: 3%)

Governance
15%

Private
4%

Multi‐Sector
0%

149

Environment (inc.
of Climate
Change)
4%

Annex 4. Distribution of Donor Funds Per Partner Agency

150

To Tahoua

To Agadez

To Nguigmi

10°E

NIGER

Illela

Kaura
Namoda

Nguru

Kano

Z AM
A M FAR A

Dutse

Ilorin

Lafia

Lokoja

ab
a

EDO
Benin
City

D E LTA

Nige
r

Asaba

Sapete
Warri

5°N

Yenogoa

Enugu

Awka

Owerri

RIVERS

M
Man
da
ra

th

Abakaliki

NIG ERIA

EBONYI
Umuahia

IMO ABIA

Port
BAYELSA Harcourt

N

Guinea

Go

ENUGU
A
MBR
ANA

LAGOS
Lagos

Chappal Waddi
(2,419 m )

Udi Hills

ONDO

OGUN

TA R A B A

BENUE

Akure

OSUN

Wukari

Makurdi

KOGI

NIGERIA

Bali

s.

Ado-Ekiti

A
Jalingo

Yola

Mt

EKI
EK ITT I

e

Shendam

Benue

Oshogbo

nu

Uyo
AKWAIBOM

Aba

CAMEROON

CROSS
RIVER
Calabar

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
STATE CAPITALS
5°N

To
Doula

MAIN ROADS

5°E

0

Delta

Bioko I.
(EQ. GUINEA)

0
10°E

50

100

50

150

100

200 Kilometers

150 Miles

RAILROADS
STATE BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

IBRD 33458

SEPTEMBER 2004

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

ig

er

10°N

r
Ta

N AS
A S AR AWA

OYO
O
YO

P L AT E A U

eau

FEDERAL
CAPITAL
Baro TERRITORY

K WA R A

ts
.

Bunga

Plat

ABUJA

N ig
er

of

Jos

Jos

Minna

Gulf

Gombe

Ba u c h i
P l a te a u

AW

To
Bori

Biu

AM

NIGER

G OM
BE
OMB

Bauchi

KADUNA

a

ngola

AD

dun
Ka

Go

Be

Wawa

To
Lomé

CHAD

Maiduguri

Damaturu

Pokiskum

BAUCHI

Kaduna

Kontagora

Kainji
Reservoir

Abeokuta

B ORN
ORNO
O

Y OB
E
OBE

K AN O
Zaria

Ibadan

Lake Chad

a
Gan
gu

Ko
ma
d

J I G AWA

Gusau

Nig
er

10°N

u

K AT S I N A

o

2001 Level

Oamasak

be
Yob

S a h e l Hadejia

ot
ok

S

Birnin
Kebbi

BENIN

1973 Level

ob

Katsina

ma

KE BB
KEB
BI

e

Y

Sokoto
Ri

To
Kandi

1963 Level

SOKOTO

To
Kandi

Jam
aar
i

NIGER

15°E

