RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA RWANDA

RWANDA
RWANDA

RWANDA

88941 v1

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA
RWANDA

RWANDA RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA
RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

RWANDA RWANDA
RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

Public Disclosure Authorized

RWANDA

RWANDA

RWANDA

FY2014-2018

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR RWANDA

Photo: World Bank

Exective Summary

1

Rwanda’s progress has been rapid in recent
years, building on a two-decade-long
turnaround which has been remarkable in
both its pace and breadth. A highly strategic
approach to development has galvanized
domestic and external resources around
nationally-defined goals and delivered high
rates of economic growth, a significant decline
in poverty, a reduction in inequality and progress
in nearly all developmental outcomes. Rwanda
has done extremely well to reap the postconflict dividend, and now it is time to focus
on challenging second-generation economic
reforms of export diversification, structural
transformation, regional integration and financial
sector deepening. Alongside this economic
transformation, the Government will need to
boost the incomes of the poorest to maintain the
gains in poverty reduction and oversee the social
and institutional transitions that come with rapid
economic change. This strategy sets out how the
combined World Bank Group resources can best
help Rwanda achieve its poverty reduction and
shared prosperity goals.

Accelerating Economic Growth

Poverty reduction and shared prosperity

2

Efforts in reducing both poverty and
inequality—from high starting points—
have been impressive. The poverty headcount
dropped, with the share of population living
below the national poverty line falling from
59 percent in the early 2000s to 45 percent in
2011. In Kigali, home to 10 percent of Rwanda’s
population, the incidence of poverty decreased
from 22.7 percent in 2001 to 16.8 percent
in 2011. Starting from a much higher base,
the rest of the country experienced a 15
percentage point drop in poverty. The poverty
gap ratio, which takes into account the
distance separating the poor from the poverty
line, dropped by almost 10 percentage points,
from 24.4 percent in 2001 to 14.8 percent in
2011. This implies that those who still live
below the poverty line are now closer to it than
they were in 2001, which bodes well for future
poverty reduction. Inequality, as measured by
the Gini coefficient, fell from 0.52 to 0.49.

iii

3

Though growth was strong throughout the
last decade, it is only in the last five years
that there has been an effective translation
into poverty reduction. The first half of the
decade (2001-2006) was characterized by high
growth in Kigali and low, pro-rich growth in
the rest of the country, leading to an increase
in inequality and modest poverty reduction.
The second half of the decade (2006-2011)
experienced higher overall growth, mainly
concentrated in rural areas, and recorded an
exceptionally strong growth rate for the poor, in
particular the extremely poor. The net result is a
decade of strong growth and poverty reduction
during which welfare gains were realized
at each point in the distribution and were
relatively higher for the poor. The agriculture
sector has seen household-level agricultural
production more than double between 2001
and 2011, accounting for 35 percent of the
national’s reduction in poverty.
Government’s visions and aspirations

4

The Government’s medium term vision
and targets are set out in a series of
sectoral, locality-specific and overarching
strategic development plans. The medium
term goals are set out in the second Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy
(EDPRS 2), which aims to accelerate private
sector-led growth and further reduce poverty,
including extreme poverty. It seeks to do so
while reducing aid-dependency and increasing
self-reliance. The four thematic areas are: (i)
economic transformation, to achieve high
and sustained growth and restructure the
economy towards services and industry,
(ii) rural development, to bring the national
poverty rate below 30 percent, (iii) productivity
and youth employment, to ensure growth and
1

iv

transformation are supported by appropriate
skills, and (iv) accountable governance, to
improve service delivery and increase citizen
participation in and satisfaction with delivery
of development. These thematic areas are
supported by eight foundational issues which
are long-term ongoing priorities and seven
cross-cutting issues.1

5

The Government has set demanding
targets across the four thematic areas. These
include targets for economic growth, reduction
of poverty and extreme poverty, increases in the
installed electricity capacity, promotion of exports,
shifts towards a more urbanized population,
enhancements in access to infrastructure,
improvements in the quality of the labor force,
creation of jobs and SMEs and improved quality
of public services. Though some targets are very
ambitious, the direction established by the results
framework of the EDPRS 2 accords strongly with
Bank Group and IMF assessments of the priority
challenges. Taken together, the targets represent
a highly ambitious agenda for inclusive growth
over the coming years.

6

Projections show that poverty targets,
though demanding, are attainable—
but only if past patterns of growth in
consumption and reduction in inequality are
repeated in the future. Growth alone is unlikely
to reduce poverty sufficiently, and therefore a
balanced approach that emphasizes rapid
growth for the lowest two quintiles of the
population will be crucial. While the vision for
the future emphasizes the need for off-farm
employment to be created for an increasingly
urbanized population, an anchor in agricultural
productivity and rural development will remain
important to achieve this balance.

The foundational issue areas are macroeconomic stability, demographics, food security, basic education, primary health care, rule of law, PFM, and decentralization;
cross cutting issue areas are capacity building, environment, gender, regional integration, HIV/AIDS and non-communicable diseases (NCDs), disaster management,
and social inclusion.

F Y 2 0 1 4 - 2 0 1 8 • country partnership strategy for R WA N D A

7

Accelerating growth and creating jobs
through the intensification and deepening
of the private sector lies at the heart of
the development challenge and implies
significant action at policy and investment
levels. The imperative for job creation is
extremely strong; the total non-farm labor force
increased from 442,000 in 2001 to 1.4 million in
2011. About 100,000 formal and informal jobs
are currently created per year, which is only
half the annual growth needed to maximize
benefits from the demographic dividend.

8

Despite the very strong performance
with respect to the investment climate,
multiple challenges remain. The private sector
is relatively small and weak, and geography,
low productivity and high energy costs make
Rwanda expensive for enterprises dependent
on sea ports or energy-intensive processes.
The domestic market is relatively limited and
expanding trade has been hampered by crossborder tensions and inefficiencies. Enterprise
surveys—and feedback from the private
sector during the consultations for this CPS—
confirm key challenges, highlighting access
to finance and availability of land as the most
severe constraints, followed by infrastructure
(electricity and transport) and labor skills.
Other issues relate to the arbitrary, uncertain
and unpredictable way in which certain areas
of regulation are enforced.
Strategic options

9

The resources of the WBG are modest
relative to the financing needs of the EDPRS.
Selectivity in using IDA and close collaboration
with IFC and MIGA are critical in delivering the
maximum impact with these limited funds.
The CPS identifies a set of principles used
in defining future areas of engagement in

Accelerating Economic Growth

Rwanda, comprising: (i) alignment with the
twin goals of growth and poverty reduction;
(ii) comparative advantage relative to other
donors; (iii) opportunity to maximise internal
WBG synergies and present a coherent ‘one
Bank Group’ approach; (iv) client demand;
(v) risk especially with respect to capacity
constraints both on the side of Government
and the WBG. Based on this approach, the CPS
identifies selected priorities for WBG support
within three main themes.

10

The first theme has as its objective:
‘accelerating economic growth that is
private-sector driven and job-creating’. This
includes IDA investments and analytical
work in energy (to tackle high costs and low
reliability which are major barriers to enterprise
development) and urban development (to
enable the Government’s industrial strategy
and also help reduce poverty which is lower
in urban areas). It envisages active investment
by IFC in the financial sector, supported by
analytical work by both IFC and the World
Bank. IFC also foresees direct investments in
the private sector by IFC, alongside potential
MIGA guarantees. Both IFC and the WB will
engage in policy and analytical work in private
sector development, leveraging of publicprivate partnerships (PPPs) and investment
climate work.

11

The second theme is: ‘improving
the productivity and incomes of the
poor through rural development and social
protection’. With 80 percent of the labor force
dependent on agriculture, this sector is key to
increasing incomes. This needs investments
in agricultural productivity (partly because of
limited scope for expanding cultivable land
area), nutrition (to combat child malnutrition in

v

rural areas), rural roads and IFC investments in
horticulture, agribusiness and microfinance. In
social protection, IDA will support an expansion
of Rwanda’s social protection system, notably
the flagship Vision Umurenge Program.
Support will also help strengthen core service
delivery and the effective management and
harmonization of Rwanda’s social protection
system. There will be additional investments
for specific vulnerable groups (for example,
demobilized ex-combatants or victims of
gender-based violence).

12

The third theme comprises: ‘Supporting
accountable governance through publicfinancial management and decentralization’.
This supports the Government’s objective of
decentralising decision-making and making
Government more open and participatory in its
processes. This will include likely IDA investment
in PFM, fiscal decentralization, statistical systems
and open data. A team is currently considering
the viability of a Program for Results operation
that would drive results in areas of public
financial management, fiscal decentralization,
statistical capacity and open data.

13

Working across these themes is the need
to invest in and promote greater regional
integration. Rwanda’s size and location will
mean that stronger integration with regional
economies will be vital for further growth.
There are two elements to this. The first relates
to the need to expand markets for potential
investors, to the need to turn “land-locked” into
“land-linked” in the interests of competitiveness.
Countries of the region represent potential
markets for exports, managers of transport
corridors and facilitators of cross-border trade.
As such regional integration is as foundational
to the future growth path as having a sound
domestic investment climate. Secondly, regional

vi

integration and cross-border investments will
hopefully bring with it greater political stability
and security in the region.

14

Rwanda has expressed its interest in a
number of cross-border investments
in the Great Lakes region to make use of
regional IDA resources. These include the
financing of hydropower generation on the
borders with DRC and Burundi and improved
transport connections. IFC and MIGA stand
ready to engage in such projects where a
private sector role exists (e.g., the Rusizi 3 Power
Generation project). Some of IFC’s Rwandabased clients already serve both the domestic
market and those of neighboring countries,
particularly eastern DRC. Looking East, Rwanda
has expressed interest in a number of projects
that could provide faster access to the sea or
more reliable access to affordable energy.
Delivering for results

15

IDA allocations for the CPS period remain
indicative at this stage. The working
assumption is that allocations will be similar
to those in the past, perhaps a little higher in
recognition of the improving CPIA score and the
switch from a mix of grants and credits to credits
only. As such, IDA may commit approximately
US$200-250 million a year during IDA17, likely
spread across three investment operations, two
PforR operations and one series of three DPOs.
In addition, regional IDA should be leveraged
for some priority investments.

16

Budget support has been a highly
effective instrument for the delivery of
predictable, flexible financing to a reformminded government who spent the resources
well. But fluctuations in aid flows have to be
managed carefully, and this CPS anticipates

F Y 2 0 1 4 - 2 0 1 8 • country partnership strategy for R WA N D A

different combinations of instruments that
offer some flexibility in the financing that is
delivered. This CPS proposes less emphasis on
development policy lending. The Government
has requested more of the IDA17 allocation
in the form of program for results (PforR)
operations. While the previous CAS disbursed
66 percent in the form of budget support, this
CPS is likely to disburse the same proportion
as a mix of PforR and Development Policy
Operations.

17

IFC has ten deals outstanding in Rwanda
with committed volume of US$38
million. They envisage that their investments
will rise to US$120m by the end of the strategy
period, the bulk of which would be in the
financial sector. IFC expects to engage in the
financial sector through a local currency credit
line, a local currency bond issue and supporting
the establishment of a microfinance bank. In
the infrastructure sector they have identified
likely support to the Rusizi III power generation
project, Lake Kivu methane extraction
projects and Kigali Bulk Water Supply. With
respect to manufacturing, IFC is considering
investment for a mix-use commercial building
in Kigali. IFC’s Advisory Services portfolio has
been highly valued and regularly received
acknowledgement for innovation and impact
through the IFC awards schemes. The Rwanda
Entrepreneurship Development Program, the
Rwanda Investment Climate Program and the
Efficient Security Markets Initiative (ESMID)
have been particularly useful.

Accelerating Economic Growth

18

MIGA currently has two active projects
(KivuWatt and Bakhresa Grain Milling) in
Rwanda (total gross exposure of $110 million.
MIGA is open for business across all of its
Political Risk Insurance product lines, including
Transfer Restriction, Expropriation, Breach of
Contract and War and Civil Disturbance, as well
as the Non-Honoring of Sovereign Obligations.
Managing risks

19

Risks to growth and poverty reduction
arise from variable climatic conditions,
and the private sector response to
government reforms. Stepping up measures
to make agriculture more climate-resilient, for
instance through the construction of irrigation
facilities and terracing which the Bank is
supporting, will be critical. Support for the
private sector is targeted at taking advantage
of a better business environment. External risks
relate to the pace of regional integration and
the potential for regional conflict, more-rapidthan expected tapering of donor inflows, and
a prolonged slump in the global economy. The
CPS seeks to mitigate the risks on the regional
integration side through regional projects,
the exposure to flu ctuations in aid flows
through the choice of instruments and the aid
dependence through measures to improve
domestic revenues.

vii

