Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 89503 GZ

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FY 15-16
for
THE WEST BANK AND GAZA

October 8, 2014

West Bank and Gaza Country Management Unit
Middle East and North Africa Region
Middle East and North Africa Strategy Unit
International Finance Corporation
MIGA Operations
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Currency Equivalents (As of October 8, 2014)
Currency Unit = New Israeli Shekel
US$1.00 = 3.7 New Israeli Shekel

DPG

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Analytical and Advisory Activities
LGU
Local Government Unit
Agence Française de Développement
MIGA
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Affordable Mortgage and Loan
MoFA
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Program
Anti-Money Laundering
MOH
Ministry of Health
Combating the Financing of Terrorists
Program
Coordinator of Government Activities
MOPWH Ministry of Public Works and Housing
in the Territories
Development Policy Grant
MSME
Micro and Small Medium Enterprises

E4E
EC
EU
FDI
GDP

Education for Employment
European Commission
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross Domestic Product

NDP
NGO
PA
PCBS
PEFA

GoI
IBRD

PLA
PMA

IMF
ISN

Government of Israel
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
Islamic Cooperation for Insuring
Investments and Export Credit
Information and Communications
Technology
International Development
Association
Israel Electric Corporation
International Finance Corporation
West Bank and Gaza Investment
Guarantee Trust Fund
International Monetary Fund
Interim Strategy Note

JSC

Joint Service Council

LDF

Local Development Forum

WB & G
WBG
WHO

AAA
AFD
AMAL
AML
CFT
COGAT

ICIEC
ICT
IDA
IEC
IFC
IGTF

Vice President
Director
Task Team Leader

PPIAF
PWA
SAACB
SME
TA
TFGWB
UN
USAID

IBRD and IDA
Inger Andersen
Steen Jorgensen
Ranjana Mukherjee

National Development Plan
Non-Governmental Organization
Palestinian Authority
Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics
Public Expenditure & Financial
Accountability
Palestinian Land Authority
Palestinian Monetary Authority
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory
Facility
Palestinian Water Authority
State Audit and Administrative
Control Bureau
Small and Medium Enterprises
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund for Gaza and West Bank
United Nations
United States Agency for International
Development
West Bank and Gaza
World Bank Group
World Health Organization

IFC
Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Mouayed Makhlouf
Youssef Habesch

ii

MIGA
Keiko Honda
Edith Quintrell
Layali Abdeen

Contents
I.
II.

Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 1
Political and Economic Context ............................................................................................................ 2
A. Political Developments ..................................................................................................................... 2
B. Recent Economic Developments and Prospects ............................................................................... 3
C. Arrangements for Assisting the West Bank and Gaza ...................................................................... 7

III. Implementation Experience of the Portfolio ......................................................................................... 8
A. Experience of the Previous Interim Strategy (FY 2012-14) ............................................................. 8
B. Lessons of Implementation Experience .......................................................................................... 10
IV. The PA’s Program and Development Challenges ............................................................................... 11
A. The Palestinian National Development Plan (NDP) 2014 to 2016 ................................................. 11
B. Development Challenges ................................................................................................................ 11
V.
A.
B.
C.
D.

Details of the Proposed Engagement (FY2015 – 16).......................................................................... 13
Guiding Principles .......................................................................................................................... 13
Proposed Program ........................................................................................................................... 14
Cross-cutting Themes in Program Implementation ........................................................................ 22
Communications and Outreach ....................................................................................................... 23

VI. Risks.................................................................................................................................................... 23
Annex 1. Results Monitoring Framework................................................................................................... 25
Annex 2. Donor Funds that complement the Bank’s Grants and Technical Assistance ............................. 29
Annex 3. Summary of Donors’ Assistance in Different Sectors ................................................................ 31
Annex 4. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ........................................ 32
Annex 5. Bank Operations Portfolio ........................................................................................................... 33
Annex 6. IFC’s Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio........................................... 34

Tables in text
Table 1. Labor Force Statistics (2nd quarter of 2014) .................................................................................. 3
Table 2: WB&G Central Government Fiscal Operations (commitment basis), 2010-2017 ......................... 6
Table 3. Pillar 1 Outcomes and Areas of Engagement to Help Achieve Assistance Strategy Objectives .. 15
Table 4. Pillar 2 Outcomes and Areas of Engagement to Help Achieve Assistance Strategy Objectives .. 19

Figures in text
Figure 1. Gaza's labor productivity is lower than that of the West Bank and East Jerusalem ...................... 4

Boxes in text
Box 1. Progress towards Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) .......................................................... 12
iii

This Assistance Strategy for the West Bank and Gaza was prepared under the direction of Steen
Jorgensen by a team comprising Lina Abdallah, Layali Abdeen, Nabila Assaf, Nina Bhatt, Roger Cunill,
Ibrahim Dajani, Nour Nasir Eddin, Rapti Goonesekere, Victoria Gyllerup, Elena Ianchovichina, Mary
Koussa, Youssef Habesch, Samira Hemsi, Samira Hillis, Riham Hussein, Abdelwahab Khatib, Nadi
Mashni, Piers Merrick, Pierre Messali, Bushra Mohammad, Ranjana Mukherjee, Teri Nachazel, Orhan
Niksic, Anita Nyajur, Bjorn Philipp, Alexandra Pugachevsky, Iyad Rammal, Nikolai Soubbotin, Simon
Stolp, Lina Tutunji and Velayutham Vijayaveri.

iv

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The World Bank Group’s involvement in the Palestinian territories dates back to 1992 when
it provided the blueprint for donors’ subsequent involvement in the West Bank and in Gaza. The IFC
began investing in the West Bank & Gaza (WB & G) after the 1993 and 1995 Oslo Accords, while MIGA
initiated activities in 1997 with its West Bank and Gaza Investment Guarantee Trust Fund (IGTF).
2.
This proposal for the World Bank Group’s forthcoming engagement during the period FY
2015-16 has been developed jointly by IFC, MIGA and the World Bank. The last Interim Strategy
(for the period FY 2012-14) was also a joint product of the Bank and IFC. During its implementation
period, MIGA’s program grew considerably—both in the West Bank and in Gaza. IFC’s and MIGA’s
participation in the current strategy has enhanced its emphasis on private sector development.
3.
Prolonged conflict and deep-seated uncertainty has required the World Bank to rely on
occasional interim strategy notes rather than medium-term partnership strategies and frameworks.
However, Executive Directors have reviewed the program regularly: twice in the intervening two years, in
May 2013 and May 2014, the Board discussed the program’s implementation in response to political and
economic developments. The previous strategy was accompanied by a results monitoring framework,
which the country team used to assess progress and to draw lessons of implementation experience that are
summarized in this document.
4.
In the highly unpredictable operating environment, institution strengthening to build the
foundation of a strong Palestinian administration has been central to the Bank’s program, while
IFC has focused on the development of the financial and infrastructure sectors. The Bank has been
assisting the Palestinian territories since 1994, with assistance financed from IBRD’s net income, with
each transfer requiring the approval of the Board of Governors. Leveraging donors’ funds, selective
engagement and systematic follow-up on implementation have allowed continuity in the program: six
development policy grants have supported the Palestinian agenda of public financial management and
fiscal strengthening, while investment projects have helped develop the education, municipal, water and
social protection sectors. Since 2008, IFC has invested US$269 million to support private firms in the
financial and infrastructure sectors.
5.
The Bank Group’s response to the situation in Gaza is part of this Assistance Strategy.
Hostilities began in early July 2014 and continued until the end of August. A cease-fire, announced in the
end of August 2014, has provided the space to provide humanitarian assistance, initiate early recovery
and plan international assistance for reconstruction. As the humanitarian numbers show, the latest conflict
is more serious in terms of lives lost, physical destruction and productive losses than any previous conflict
in Gaza. The World Bank Group (WBG) is supporting the recovery effort led by the Palestinian Authority
(PA) and WBG response is closely coordinated with other donors. An aid conference, convened by the
PA, Egypt and Norway is scheduled on October 12, 2014. A MIGA-supported project in Gaza has been
damaged in the hostilities. Given its current foothold in the financial and infrastructure sectors in the West
Bank, IFC will focus its Gaza reconstruction efforts in both of these sectors.
6.
The Assistance Strategy will balance short-term stabilization and reconstruction activities
with operations that serve as platforms for maintaining continuous dialogue with the PA and
donors. This deliberate “twin-track” strategy permits a continued emphasis on longer-term development
priorities (state building, service delivery and support for private sector-led growth) while also retaining
the high degree of flexibility needed to respond rapidly to emergency and other immediate needs. In view
of the limited financial envelope available, the World Bank will also continue to play a catalytic role

1

among development partners using World Bank-supported operations as opportunities to leverage and
coordinate additional donor co-financing.
7.
The strategy outlined below is aligned with the Palestinian National Development Plan
(2014-16) and the experience with the Bank group’s previous (FY 2012-14) interim strategy. The
first pillar remains centered on strengthening public institutions for state building and improving service
delivery. The second pillar continues to be focused on private sector development—with an added
emphasis on increasing employment opportunities (through supporting reforms that encourage job
creation in the private sector.) The same elements that constrain economic growth in the Palestinian
territories overall affect Gaza even more, with Gaza reconstruction initiatives falling within both pillars.
The development of this strategy has been informed by upstream discussions with various parts of the
Palestinian Authority, private sector representatives, civil society and with donor partners. Genderinformed interventions, introduced in the program during the implementation of the previous strategy,
will be scaled up based on a gender action plan developed in FY 14.

II.

POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT
A.

Political Developments

8.
The Palestinian Authority was established in the West Bank and Gaza shortly after the Oslo
Accords of 1993. The PA assumed civilian responsibility for most of the Palestinian residents: its
security powers were limited, however, to the major urban centers. Israel maintained full control of large
tracts of land around settlements and primary movement axes, leaving 61 percent of the West Bank (socalled Area C) outside the PA’s reach. Under the Oslo accords, this arrangement was intended as a
temporary measure, to be replaced by a final-status agreement by the year 2000, but it still remains in
force. Several peace processes were initiated but none so far have been successful.
9.
In November 2012, the UN voted in favor of the Palestinian Authority’s application for
becoming a non-member observer state. While opening the door to the PA to apply for membership in
a number of UN agencies, the positive vote put an additional strain on its relationship with Israel. US
facilitated Palestinian-Israeli peace talks re-started in mid-2013. By the end of March 2014, the peace
talks began to stall. After Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas forged a unity pact with Hamas (which
formed the de facto authority in Gaza), Israel suspended its participation in the talks. Political
developments in the region such as in Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria have added to the
complexity of the topics being negotiated.
10.
A “consensus” Palestinian government was established in May 2014, with a cabinet of
technocrats, who are not affiliated to any political party, endorsed by both Fatah (the party led by
President Abbas) and Hamas. The violence that erupted in Gaza in early July 2014 and continued until the
end of August has put a strain on the consensus government. Service delivery in Gaza is complicated by
the existence of two distinct public services—one paid and managed by the PA in Ramallah, and the other
by the de facto authority in Gaza—and the current arrangement is unsustainable.
11.
The situation in Gaza is extremely volatile. Even before the crisis, two thirds of the population
of Gaza was receiving food assistance, and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine ran
eight refugee camps, with schools, medical centers and food distribution points, where more than half a
million people (28 percent of the population) lived. All movement of people and goods in and out of Gaza
has been restricted since June 2007 by both Israel and Egypt. Israeli restrictions have been eased since
2010 for some construction materials, but exports are still virtually blocked from Gaza and must be
destined for a third country (neither Israel nor the West Bank, which traditionally absorbed 85 percent of
2

Gaza’s exports.) However, there is little world demand for goods made in Gaza: a few fruits and flowers
grown in a Dutch-supported project were exported to the Netherlands. The supply of basic necessities was
restricted with Egypt’s 2013 clamp-down on the tunnel trade (movement of goods through illegal tunnels
dug under the border between Gaza and Egypt) and prices rose sharply.
12.
The recent conflict in Gaza has created a humanitarian crisis and dramatically worsened
the development challenges. More than 2100 Palestinians died during the hostilities, and a third of the
population was internally displaced. The conflict resulted in massive destruction of infrastructure.
According to the PA’s estimates, as presented in its report to the Cairo conference on Gaza
reconstruction, the total damage is close to US$4 billion. These numbers, as well as proposals for
implementation of reconstruction, are being refined in a full damage needs assessment led by the PA with
support from the EU, UN and World Bank. Gaza reconstruction will require the PA to agree with the
Government of Israel (GoI) on an effective entry and access system to allow critical construction
materials into Gaza, and allowing reconstruction activities to be led by private contractors. The system
would need to ensure entry of materials under the PA’s leadership, assuring the GoI and donors that
building materials are used only for the purposes intended. The efficacy and efficiency of this system will
significantly affect the time and cost of the reconstruction process, but also the accumulating economic
impact of the conflict.

B.

Recent Economic Developments and Prospects

13.
The Palestinian economy was slowing down even before the Gaza conflict. Following a
period of sustained economic recovery during 2007 to 2011 when average yearly growth exceeded 8
percent, the economy has been struggling. The decline started in 2012 when the overall growth rate
halved, falling to about 6 percent as a result of a sharp drop in foreign aid. This, against a backdrop of
ongoing Israeli restrictions and high political uncertainty, led to a significant fall in public and private
consumption which caused growth rates to continue their decline, down to only 1.9 percent in 2013. The
economic situation significantly deteriorated in 2014 and preliminary estimates by the Palestine Central
Bureau of Statistics (PCBS) indicate that the economy fell into recession in the first quarter of 2014 with
growth amounting to -1 percent (0.5 percent in the West Bank and -4 percent in Gaza). The sharp drop in
Gaza’s growth was primarily caused by the closures of the tunnels with Egypt, which represented the
main trade channel for imports and exports for Gaza.
14.
The economic decline is resulting in growing unemployment. Unemployment reached 26
percent by the middle of 2014: 16 percent of the workforce in the West Bank and a staggering 45 percent
in Gaza. At 40 percent each, women and youth have particularly high levels of unemployment. What is
more, almost 23 percent of the workforce is employed by the public sector, an uncommonly high
proportion that reflects the lack of dynamism in the private sector. Labor force participation is low as
outlined in Table 1 below.
Table 1. Labor Force Statistics (2nd quarter of 2014)
Indicator

West Bank and Gaza

Unemployment
Underemployment
Labor force participation
Youth unemployment (15 to 29)
Youth labor force participation
Female Unemployment
Female Labor Force Participation

26.3
6.4
45.8
39.5
39.7
39.6
19.4

Source: PCBS Labor Force Survey, 2nd quarter, 2014.

3

West Bank
(percentage)
16.0
5.7
46.4
25.3
40.6
26.9
19.0

Gaza
45.1
7.8
44.7
63.3
38.3
60.8
20.1

15.
Even though the Palestinian economy has made considerable progress towards the twin
goals of eradicating extreme poverty and shared prosperity, challenges remain both on poverty and
inequality. The share of people living on less than US$1.25 a day is less than 1 percent and between
2004 and 2009 (the latest period where numbers are available), the annual per capita income growth of
the bottom 40 percent of the population slightly outpaced the average per capita income
growth. However, the $1.25 poverty line is not appropriate for the Palestinian situation, as evidenced by
25.8 percent living in poverty in 2011(latest data available) according to the national, basic-needs based
poverty line. In addition, a GINI coefficient of 40.3 percent indicates a significant level of income
inequality in the Palestinian territories.
16.
Israeli restrictions1 on economic activity, in particular those on trade, movement and access,
are a binding constraint to economic and social progress. These restrictions substantially increase the
cost of trade and make it impossible to import many production inputs into the Palestinian territories. As
described above, the restrictions on import and export and on movement of people for Gaza are
particularly severe. In addition to the restrictions on labor movement between the Palestinian territories,
the restrictions on movement of labor within the West Bank have been shown to have a strong impact on
employability, wages, and economic growth. Moreover, Israeli restrictions render much economic activity
very difficult or impossible to conduct in Area C, comprising 61 percent of the West Bank territory. A
recent report by the Bank assessed that removal of Area C restrictions would permit an increase in
Palestinian GDP by an estimated 35 percent.
17.
Even before the recent fighting, Gaza’s economy had been unsustainable due to recurring
conflict and blockade on exports and imports. Economic activity was paralyzed and infrastructure
damaged during multiple episodes of conflict. In the past decade, manufacturing sector employment
plummeted from 9 percent to 5 percent mainly from the loss of main export markets (Israel and the West
Bank). Gaza’s labor force productivity is lower than that in the West Bank or in East Jerusalem, mainly
because firms there are able to invest less in capital goods. The destruction caused by a series of conflicts
in recent years, and in particular the last conflict, has seriously reduced the productive capacity of Gaza’s
economy.

US$ per worker (2009
US$)

Figure 1. Gaza's labor productivity is lower than that of the West Bank and East Jerusalem
$25,000

Value Added per worker

Capital per worker (sales value)

$20,000
$15,000
$10,000
$5,000
$0

West Bank

East
Jerusalem

Gaza

West Bank

East
Jerusalem

Gaza

Source: The World Bank, 2014. West Bank and Gaza Investment Climate Assessment: Fragmentation and Uncertainty.

18.
Gaza’s energy crisis has become the primary binding constraint for firms there, second only
to political instability, resulting from long-term generation capacity deficits and poor distribution
1

According to the Government of Israel, these restrictions are for the purpose of enhancing the security of Israel and
Israeli citizens.

4

infrastructure. The situation has worsened due to chronic fuel shortage and disruption of fuel supply from
both Israel and Egypt. Because they cannot afford their own generators, Gaza’s small and medium
enterprises have been more adversely impacted by power outages (averaging around eight hours per day
in 2013) than larger firms and those located in West Bank and East Jerusalem. The damage to Gaza’s
only power generating plant during the conflict has exacerbated the crisis.
19.
Despite the recession, the PA managed to keep its finances under control in the first half of
2014. According to the MoF data, the PA’s recurrent deficit between January-June 2014 was 24 percent
lower than its mid-year budget target mainly due to a better-than-expected outturn for revenues and
expenditures. The PA has been making efforts to improve revenue performance and reduce the share of
government expenditure in the economy. Efforts have been geared towards widening the tax base and
collecting arrears and liabilities from delinquent tax payers. It has continued implementing a Revenue
Strategy and Action Plan that puts emphasis on tax policy and enforcement measures. If the PA’s ongoing
efforts to strengthen governance in Gaza succeed, tax revenues could increase significantly as the
potential tax revenues from Gaza are close to 19 percent of the PA’s total revenues in 2013. No revenues
currently collected for Gaza’s electricity bill are remitted to the PA, while the PA pays the entire
electricity bill for Gaza as it is directly deducted by Israel from the PA’s revenues through the clearance
process. If this were to change, the PA’s projected revenues would increase by at least US$200 million.
The PA has placed control on the wage bill, which is the largest spending item representing more than 50
percent of recurrent expenditures. In fact, the wage bill grew by less than 2 percent in 2013 mainly due to
a zero net hiring policy that the PA has put in place since late 2012. Reducing net lending (utility
subsidies) continues to be a key priority for the PA. The Bank has recently finalized a study that identifies
the main drivers of this complex issue, something that was not done before. Based on the
recommendations of the study, the PA has already taken some steps to reduce net lending. With support
from USAID, a number of measures are also being implemented by the Ministry of Health (MoH) to
improve the efficiency of health expenditures in particular through streamlining the costs of outside
referrals.
20.
However, the PA’s fiscal position for the remainder of the year remains highly vulnerable
due to spending pressures in Gaza. Year-end revenues are expected to be higher than previously
anticipated due to stronger-than-expected growth in clearance revenues. However, expenditures are also
expected to exceed forecasts on account of higher-than-expected non-wage spending and net lending. The
total deficit is expected to amount to US$1.49 billion by the end of 2014 and aid to the public sector for
recurrent and development spending is projected at US$1.48 billion, which is almost sufficient to cover
the PA’s regular spending needs. Additional spending on reconstruction in Gaza, however, is expected to
add significant fiscal pressures that may jeopardize the PA’s fiscal position if additional aid is not
secured.

21.

Despite significant losses in Gaza, the banking sector remains healthy thanks to the efforts
of the Palestine Monetary Authority (PMA). The sector is well regulated by the PMA which has
steadily been building the capabilities of a central bank. Banks in general are risk averse and profitable
due to several reasons including cheap sources of deposits and healthy margins. The year-on-year growth
of the sector’s net assets was 15 percent in June 2014, and its net income grew by 4 percent when
compared to the same period last year. The banking sector has a high credit exposure to the Palestinian
Authority and its employees, and the PMA is carefully monitoring related risks. The ratio of nonperforming loans to gross loans continues to be low at 3 percent; however, this is expected to increase due
to the recent conflict as the capacity of some individuals and businesses to service their loan installments
has significantly deteriorated. The PMA has already taken measures to deal with the effects of the latest
conflict on the banking sector. It has recently reached an agreement with banks to reprogram loans
(principal and interest payments) for six months and waive some fees for the people of Gaza. It has also
reduced risk reserves from 2 percent of risk weighted assets to 0.5 percent.
5

Table 2: WB&G Central Government Fiscal Operations (commitment basis), 2010-2017
Estimate
Projections
2013
2014
2015
(In millions of US$)
2312
2657
2874
853
811
879
598
556
589
255
255
290
1691
2042
2165
231
197
170
..
22
..
..
174
..

2010

2011

2012

Total net revenues
Gross domestic revenues
Tax revenues
Nontax revenues
Clearance revenues
Less tax refunds
VAT
Petroleum rebate

1836
653
382
271
1259
76
..
..

2045
738
482
256
1423
116
..
..

2075
729
481
248
1459
113
..
..

Recurrent expenditures and net lending
Wage expenditure
Non-wage expenditure
Net lending

2900
1614
1051
236

3139
1782
1217
140

3357
1769
1309
278

3517
1919
1388
210

3823
2043
1488
292

Recurrent balance
Development expenditures
Overall balance (before external support)
Overall balance (after external support)

-1065
299
-1364
-86

-1094
370
-1464
-452

-1281
243
-1524
-483

-1205
187
-1392
-27

Financing
External budgetary support
Development financing
Net domestic bank financing
Domestic arrears
Residual

1364
1147
131
84
-60
62

1464
843
169
93
358
1

1524
885
156
127
404
-48

1392
1259
106
-248
285
-10

Public finances (commitment basis)
Total net revenues
Recurrent expenditures and net lending
Wage expenditure
Non-wage expenditure
Net lending
Recurrent balance (before grants)
Overall balance (before grants)
Overall balance (after grants)

22.0
34.8
19.3
12.6
2.8
-12.8
-16.3
-1.0

20.9
32.1
18.2
12.5
1.4
-11.2
-15.0
-4.6

20.2
32.7
17.3
12.8
2.7
-12.5
-14.9
-4.7

Memorandum items (in millions of US$):
Nominal GDP

8344

9775

10255
555

Source: IMF, WB and PA MoF

2016

2017

3076
929
623
305
2290
142
..
..

3282
978
658
320
2418
114
..
..

3911
2132
1567
213

4032
2197
1636
199

4150
2260
1705
185

-1167
328
-1495
-11

-1037
488
-1525
-120

-956
510
-1466
-121

-868
531
-1399
-121

1495
1284
200
120
-109
0

1525
1212
193
120
0
0

1466
1137
208
121
0
0

1399
1056
222
121
0
0

23.9
32.5
17.7
13.0
1.8
-8.6
-12.7
-1.0

23.8
31.2
17.0
12.7
1.5
-7.4
-11.3
-0.9

23.8
30.1
16.4
12.4
1.3
-6.3
-10.1
-0.9

12018

12920

13794

(In percent of GDP)
20.5
24.0
31.1
34.5
17.0
18.4
12.3
13.4
1.9
2.6
-10.7
-10.5
-12.3
-13.5
-0.2
-0.1

11302

11090

Note: The PA has been repaying operational arrears and recording these payments as expenditures. This
accounting misclassification was fixed in the table from 2014 onwards, but the lack of data on the exact amount of
these payments in previous years prevented us from fixing this misclassification prior to 2014.

22.
Year-end GDP projections indicate that the Palestinian economy will shrink in 2014, but
growth is expected to rebound in 2015. Projections indicate that the growth rate in the Palestinian
territories will be about -4 percent in 2014 driven by the recession in Gaza and stagnation in the West
Bank. Even though reconstruction efforts are expected to start reviving economic activity in Q4, this will
not be enough to push Gaza’s economy out of recession, and hence, growth in Gaza is expected to be -15
percent by the end of 2014. In the West Bank, the overall decline in the confidence level and the conflict
in the city of Hebron that took place in June/July 2014 are expected to have had a damaging effect on
economic activity during the first three quarters of the year. A slight recovery in Q4 is expected to push
6

full-year growth rates in the West Bank back to their 2013 level at around 0.5 percent. Encouragingly,
growth in the Palestinian territories is expected to rebound to more than 4 percent in 2015 assuming that
large amounts of aid will be channeled for reconstruction. Gaza’s economy is projected to grow by 11
percent in 2015 while growth in the West Bank is expected to reach just over 2 percent.
23.
Despite having to incur additional expenditures to provide immediate assistance to the
conflict-stricken people in Gaza, the PA is expected to continue reducing the deficit in the medium
term. Based on the current projections and thanks to unexpectedly strong revenue performance, the PA is
expected to reduce its large stock of arrears to the private sector by roughly US$100 million in 2014,
which will inject some liquidity into the struggling Palestinian private sector. The PA has also recently
reduced its debt to local banks. The recurrent deficit is projected to keep falling over the medium term
from 11 percent of GDP in 2013 and 2014 to 6 percent in 2017. The overall deficit is also expected to
drop from 12 percent to 10 percent over the same period. This declining deficit trend is in line with the
IMF’s assessment. Notably, planned pension system reforms have not been implemented yet due to
unconducive political economy and social pressures, which is resulting in significant contingent liabilities
of about US$1.6 billion for the PA’s budget in the medium to long term.

C.

Arrangements for Assisting the West Bank and Gaza

Trust Fund for Gaza and the West Bank
24.
To enable the Bank’s assistance to the Palestinian territories, a trust fund was established.
The special arrangement was necessary to channel the Bank’s financial assistance because being neither a
member of the IMF nor the World Bank made the PA ineligible for the sources of financing normally
available to member countries. First, by Resolutions No. 93-11 and IDA 93-7, a trust fund (then called the
Trust Fund for Gaza) was established in 1993 and US$50 million was transferred from IBRD surplus.
Two years later, in August 1995, the Board of Governors renamed it the Trust Fund for Gaza and the
West Bank (TFGWB) as the territorial scope was modified to cover the area under the jurisdiction of the
PA.
West Bank and Gaza Investment Guarantee Trust Fund
25.
Another Trust Fund was established to enable political risk guarantees by MIGA. The West
Bank and Gaza Investment Guarantee Trust Fund (IGTF) was established in 1997 and offers foreign
investors the coverage against political risks such as convertibility restrictions, expropriation, war and
civil disturbance or even a breach of a commercial contract that the investor has entered with a
government. In 2008, the US$ 26 million fund had a key operational regulation change and was able to
offer political risk insurance to both foreign and local investors. This departed from MIGA's standard
cover, which applies to cross-border investments. As of September 2013, the IGTF had issued US$18.3
million worth of guarantees. With the remaining trust fund capacity at US$7.7 million and formal
applications requiring over US$13 million worth of guarantees currently being underwritten, the IGTF is
currently unable to accept any new projects until it is replenished.
Mobilization of Donor Funding
26.
The Bank’s assistance from the Trust Fund for Gaza and the West Bank leverages
substantial complementary resources from donors. In recent years, the TFGWB has been annually
replenished by $55 million from the IBRD surplus. Investment grants from this trust fund leverage
substantial (3.8 times) project financing from development partners. (Trust Funds contributed by donors
that complement grants from the TFGWB are listed in Annex 2). The Bank’s DPGs (typically US$40
million) from the TFGWB leverage four to five times their amount through the Bank-administered
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan Multi-donor Trust Fund. Australia, France, Japan, Kuwait,
Norway and UK are currently active donors to this trust fund, which provides budgetary support to the
7

PA’s reform agenda and supports the same policy areas identified in the DPGs. The Bank monitors the
PA’s progress against priority economic and institutional and policy actions that it jointly identifies with
the PA for the purpose of the most recent DPG. It makes regular disbursements, every quarter, upon
assurance of satisfactory progress of the PA’s reform agenda.
27.
Other trust funds contributed by donors complement the Bank’s operations.

To pool donors’ support for infrastructure, a Bank-administered multi-donor trust fund (TF) for
infrastructure development was established in 2012 with contributions from Denmark, Finland and
Sweden. The aim of the TF is to improve the coverage, quality, and sustainability of infrastructure in the
WB & G through financial and technical assistance to the PA in the water, urban development, and
energy sectors. To date the TF has received over US$40 million in donor contributions.

A trust fund financed by Norway (US$3.5 million) has supported analysis of economic and
sociopolitical developments. A successor trust fund, also funded by Norway, continues this engagement
and support analytical and technical assistance in the areas of public and private institutions, gender,
governance, environment and infrastructure development.
28.
Donors find World Bank-administered trust funds useful mechanisms to channel their
assistance, and are utilizing these for Gaza reconstruction. Budget support to the PA from Australia,
France, Japan, Norway and the UK is flowing through the Palestinian Reform and Development Plan
Multi-donor Trust Fund (described above). Denmark, Sweden, and Finland are supporting infrastructure
restoration and service delivery through the multi-donor infrastructure trust fund, and several other donors
(including France and the Netherlands) have recently expressed their intent to provide additional
contributions through this mechanism.
29.
Donor resources have helped mitigate the PA’s repayment burden of accumulated debt to
IDA. This debt resulted from the World Bank assistance provided during the period 1999-2003 on IDA
terms instead of grants provided currently. The World Bank has established a trust fund (Debt Relief
Trust Fund for the Palestinian Authority) to provide temporary debt relief to the PA from March 1, 2013
until February 29, 2016 with respect to the outstanding credits from the TFGWB on IDA terms. The
amount mobilized is being used to buy down 100 percent of the annual principal repayment obligations
over the three-year debt relief period and 46 percent of the annual service charges.

III.

IMPLEMENTATION EXPERIENCE OF THE PORTFOLIO
A. Experience of the Previous Interim Strategy (FY 2012-14)

30.
The previous interim strategy, jointly prepared by IFC and the World Bank, was organized
around two pillars:

To strengthen the institutions of a future state to efficiently manage public finances and
ensure services to citizens, and;

To support the creation of an enabling environment for private sector led growth.
The pillars were closely aligned with the four blocks of the Palestinian National Development Plan (201113): the first pillar with the 2011-13 NDP’s ‘governance’ and ‘social’ blocks, and the second pillar with
the ‘economy’ and ‘infrastructure’ blocks.
31.
The Bank Group’s goal of poverty reduction was addressed by the FY 2012-14 interim
strategy, while the shared prosperity goal was indirectly addressed. The Bank’s budget support
operation, and the donor resources that it leveraged, along with the focus on macro-fiscal strengthening
8

and public financial management, helped the PA free up resources in order to provide basic services.
Under the strategy’s first pillar, extremely poor Palestinians were assisted by the World Bank and
European Union through the Cash Transfer Program, and technical assistance to refine targeting of the
households that deserve to receive this assistance.
IFC’s strategy was driven by ‘staying the course’ with feasible expansion when
opportunities arose, and therefore focused on investing in sectors that are not as severely
constrained as others by the restrictions imposed on movement and access. IFC concentrated on
financial markets (including microfinance) and infrastructure sector (with a focus on telecommunication).
This strategy enabled IFC to increase its program, with a total of US$175 million (including mobilization)
being invested by IFC and other investors that IFC brought into the Palestinian territories during the
strategy period.

32.

33.
MIGA undertook a major business development outreach during the previous strategy’s
implementation period, after a period of stagnation that followed the second intifada (2000 to 2004).
With an improvement in the overall investment environment, MIGA complemented IFC’s role in
attracting private sector investors by providing political risk insurance. It insured four projects in the
amount of $7.8 million in agro-industries and manufacturing sectors. As of July, 2014, MIGA has
conducted an initial preliminary review of 25 projects for US$130 million in investments, and guaranteed
seven projects for a total of US$18.3 million.
34.
A robust set of demand-driven Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) provided policy
advice. The Bank’s analysis of development challenges through the lens of economic development has
helped frame the PA’s development agenda as well as those of the donor community and other
stakeholders. During the last strategy period and through consultation with the PA, the World Bank
Group produced a mix of reports, policy notes and technical assistance that includes:

The West Bank and Gaza Sources of Growth reviewed the issues faced by the Palestinian
economy and identified the steps necessary to set the stage of dynamic private sector growth;

The Investment Climate Assessment sought to provide empirical analysis of the investment
climate under which Palestinian businesses operate, described the key constraints, and identified reform
priorities for those aspects of the investment climate and constraints which are within the PA’s control.

Area C and the Future of the Palestinian Economy assessed the extent to which the restrictions
imposed by the Government of Israel on economic activity in Area C of the West Bank impacts overall
investment opportunities and growth of the Palestinian economy.

International Good Practices in State-NGO Relations: A Benchmark for West Bank and Gaza and
Social Accountability in Municipal Services focused on better understanding the services provided to
private citizens by municipalities and NGOs.

Efficiency of Universal Health Coverage analyzed how to increase efficiency of public health
expenditures with a view to ensuring fiscal and financial sustainability of proposed universal health
coverage.

A Study on Microwork supported job creation and poverty reduction in the virtual economy
through microwork (internet-based outsourcing of back-office functions)

Twice yearly, the Bank reported on Palestinian economic development to the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee of Donors to the Palestinian Authority. (The World Bank is secretariat to this body which is
chaired by Norway.)

IFC’s advisory activities mainly provided capacity building to private companies to improve
access to finance and strengthening the financial sector. These included building capacity in local banks,
advancing corporate governance, and developing leasing, providing support to Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs), microfinance, bank risk management, secured lending, and housing finance sub9

sectors. In FY14, IFC signed an agreement to help Bank of Palestine expand its outreach to SMEs with a
focus on women. IFC’s advisory services supported the first public private partnership in solid waste
management in the West Bank.
35.
Projects financed from the TFGWB continued to meet their development objectives in FY
2013-14. The portfolio’s performance was reviewed twice during the previous strategy implementation
period. If projects went into “problem” status they were restructured -- such as the now closed Village and
Neighborhood project which had become a problem project in FY 12. Additional financing was used as
an instrument of choice since it has allowed the Bank to respond rapidly to emerging priorities: projects
that delivered results on the ground received additional funds to expand the scope of work or to cover
financing gaps (e.g. Municipal Development project, Cash Transfer project, Palestinian NGO project.)
36.
A MNA-wide initiative to make greater use of ICT for citizens’ engagement and monitoring
was introduced in the program in FY 14 and will be scaled up as new entry points are identified. An
improved grievance redress mechanism in two pilots (one each in the West Bank and in Gaza) is planned
in the Cash Transfer Project Additional Financing, with possible scale-up to other governorates depending
on the context and possible entry points. Tools for citizens’ engagement developed for the Local
Governance and Services Improvement Program include disclosure and development of local
development strategic plans, the design of voluntary project support groups, and a grievance redress
mechanism for the overall projects so that citizens can provide feedback on the quality of services
provided and local government units’ (LGUs’) responsiveness and efficiency. Project teams are exploring
the use of citizen surveys using mobile technology. Identifying which projects lent themselves to this
new tool (e.g. the second Municipal Development project and Education to Work Transition project) was
part of the recent review of the country portfolio’s performance.

B. Lessons of Implementation Experience
37.
The Palestinian territories program benefits from a continuous process of reviews and
assessments. A retrospective of the FY 2012-14 ISN was discussed by the Country Team on March 6,
2014 and drew the following lessons from implementation experience, which motivated the guiding
principles of this strategy.

The program’s selectivity principle has served it well. The Bank continued to lead the dialogue
in the water sector where it has maintained an active presence for the past fifteen years, postponing
engagement in the health sector until the dialogue was sufficiently advanced, and not engaging in the
agriculture, transport and justice sectors where others were better placed to provide support. The program
had mixed results in areas that were new to the program. Re-engaging in the land administration sector
after six years, a second land administration project was approved in 2012 but shows moderately
unsatisfactory results and is in the process of being restructured following its mid-term review. IFC’s
focused and selective approach helped support the private sector in a financially sustainable, high impact
manner. IFC will continue this selective approach and expand engagements in new sectors depending on
the improvement in the overall environment.

The volatility of the operating environment requires continuous monitoring. Close
monitoring ensures that rapid adjustments to the portfolio can be made in response to emergencies,
deterioration in operating conditions or changes in government or donor priorities. The program’s
operating environment was hindered by outbreaks of conflict (e.g. Gaza in November 2012), social unrest
in September 2012 in reaction to price increases and civil servants’ strikes in October 2012 due to delayed
salary payments. Only nine of the twenty targeted results were achieved. The protracted financial crisis
affected outcomes of the first pillar (institutional strengthening for service delivery), where four of the six

10

targeted results in the areas of revenue and expenditure management and public financial management
were not met.

The restrictions on access also impeded the progress of Bank Group financed investments.
As Israel does not allow free entry of construction materials into Gaza and places severe constraints on
“dual-use” items both for Gaza and the West Bank, implementing projects required the World Bank’s
intensive coordination with Israeli authorities and collaboration with donor partners. Despite intensive
efforts, implementation of the ongoing Northern Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment project and Gaza
Electricity Network Rehabilitation project has been delayed. Movement and access restrictions impeded
IFC’s investment in the second mobile operator’s expansion plans into Gaza where telecommunications
equipment was denied entry for more than two years.

Program implementation adhered to the ISN’s commitment to remaining sensitive to
gender integration across the portfolio and tracking project achievements by gender wherever
possible. Of the eight investment projects that were approved by the Board during the previous strategy’s
implementation, gender disaggregated data is being tracked in seven, and as core sector indicator in five
of them. IFC has sought to address the gender gap through the financial sector, using both its investment
and advisory arms. Women constitute 55 percent of the client base of Faten, where IFC has microfinance
investment. In its advisory work with the Bank of Palestine, IFC supports women-owned businesses and
women entrepreneurs.

IV.

THE PA’S PROGRAM AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
A. The Palestinian National Development Plan (NDP) 2014 to 2016

38.

The proposed Assistance Strategy has been prepared within the overall framework of the
NDP 2014-16, which has its overall objectives outlined as “Palestinian sovereignty and realizing
economic potential, steadfastness and resistance, national unity ending the internal divide, fighting
poverty and unemployment, effective public institutions and fiscal stability.” The NDP is built upon
sector strategies that were consulted broadly with public and private sectors and civil society
organizations, and informed by the experience of the previous (2011-13) NDP. The World Bank and other
international organizations had the opportunity to review the draft strategy and to provide suggestions.
The draft plan was posted on the website of Ministry of Planning and Administrative Development to
allow public access and comments.
39.
The NDP’s major thrust is similar to that of the previous National Development Plan for
2012 to 2014. Good Governance and Institution Building, Social Protection, Economic Development and
Employment and Infrastructure are the four blocks that define the present NDP. The PA’s emphasis on
jobs is reflected in the expansion of the previous NDP’s Economic Development block to include
employment creation.
40.
The Assistance Strategy’s pillars are aligned with the NDP’s blocks. Pillar 1 is aligned with
the NDP’s Good Governance / Institution Building and Social Protection blocks, while Pillar 2 is aligned
with the Economic Development and Employment and Infrastructure blocks.
B.

Development Challenges

41.
Poverty programs have been effective in reducing poverty. The PA’s social programs
(including one of the best cash transfer programs in the region, developed with Bank and EU support)
have reduced poverty significantly. For instance, simulations carried out in 2011 show that the poverty
rate would have been 11 percentage points higher in the absence of these programs.

11

42.
Inequality and shared prosperity remain an issue driven by employment status, regional
disparities, gender and type of employment:

Poverty rates are highly correlated with employment status and thus with the overall low growth
of the private sector;

Wide regional disparities still exist between Gaza and the West Bank, with unemployment and
poverty rates at least twice as high in Gaza;

While gender issues are well-addressed in the education system, very few women are
working. Less that 35 percent of women of working age are active in the labor force and, of those, 40
percent are unemployed, resulting in only one in five women of working age actually being employed;
and

Household income depends on the type of employment with poverty rates among households
where the head works in the public sector ten percentage points below those headed by an employee in
the private sector. Similarly, poverty rates for households where the head works in the Israeli private
sector is lower.
Box 1. Progress towards Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
The PA has a national strategy to meet the MDG targets by 2015. It is complementary to the National Development
Plan, but focuses on areas targeted by the MDGs and defines the policies and interventions needed to achieve them.

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. Even though the proportion of Palestinians whose income is
below US$1.25 is extremely small, a quarter of Palestinians live in poverty according to the national poverty line
with the rate in Gaza being twice that in the West Bank (2011 data).

Achieve universal primary education. According to the Ministry of Education, net enrolment in basic
education rose from 87.5% in 1994-95 to 93.1% for males and 95.9% for females in 2013. Although school
enrolment has increased in recent years and almost universal literacy has been achieved, student performance
according to the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) scores is only around the regional
average, with significant room for improvement.

Promote gender equality and empower women. Girls outnumber boys (118%) in secondary education.
Female participation in the labor market at 18%, however, continues to be much lower than male participation at
70%. The average daily wage for females is 6% lower than that of males. The proportion of seats held by women in
local councils also increased from 2% in 2000 to 18% in 2010. However, a large proportion of married women
continue to suffer from violence the PA has recently joined “The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women” which commits the PA to undertake a series of measures to end discrimination
against women in all forms.

Reduce child mortality. The under-five mortality rate was 16.2 per 1000 live births in 2012, with the main
causes of infant deaths in the West Bank prenatal diseases, congenital malformations and blood poisoning. Child
mortality rates are significantly higher in Gaza compared to the West Bank.

Improve maternal health. Maternal mortality was 23 cases in 2012. Deliveries under the supervision of
qualified health teams in the same year reached 98.4%.

Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. The HIV/AIDS infection levels in the Palestinian
territories are extremely low. There have been no reported cases of cholera, rabies, malaria or poliomyelitis in many
years.

Ensure environmental sustainability. The proportion of land area covered by forest in 2010 was only
1.63% of the overall Palestinian territories. Only around 13% of wastewater is treated and a limited 30% of solid
waste is dumped in landfill sites in a sanitary manner. The per capita share of water is below the standard
recommended by the World Health Organization.
Source: Palestinian Authority, June 2012: The National Strategy to Achieve MDGs by 2015

43.
The Gaza situation has introduced additional development challenges on the PA. To obtain
donors’ assistance, the PA is preparing a credible, comprehensive and well-coordinated estimate of
damages, losses and needs. This will need to be a bottom-up approach, capturing information about the
effects of the conflict, sector by sector, and aggregating these data to arrive at the total effect on the
12

economy and society. To address the priorities identified, strong PA coordination of its development
partners, based on their comparative advantages and ongoing sector engagements, would be necessary.
The PA would also need to agree with the GoI on a new system for accessing the materials that would
enable it to lead reconstruction activities through private contractors. The new system would need to
allow for efficient and speedy reconstruction by private sector entities under the PA’s leadership; and
assuring the GoI and donors that building materials are used only for the purposes intended.

V.

DETAILS OF THE PROPOSED ENGAGEMENT (FY2015 – 16)
A. Guiding Principles

44.
Four principles guide the Bank Group’s work in the Palestinian territories. A sustained
focus on technical work in a highly politicized environment; selectivity based on comparative advantages;
flexibility; and enhanced focus on jobs. These principles drive both the “regular” engagement as well as
emergency operations such as those currently under preparation for Gaza.
45.
The Bank Group exercises a technical mandate in an intensely political environment, and
analyzes development challenges through the lens of economic development. As it has since 1993, the
Bank Group’s program will continue to focus on laying the foundation for a future Palestinian state by
relying on WBG comparative advantages – focus on longer term development issues, convening influence
with development partners, and sector expertise. The Bank’s apolitical stance helps coordinate with all
parties concerned.
46.
The Bank Group’s program will continue to remain selective in deploying expertise in sectors
where it has a history of engagement and has a comparative advantage. The series of budget support
operations will continue to concentrate on fiscal strengthening and public financial management, and will
be complemented by investment projects in higher education, local government, energy, water, and
municipal development. These will directly benefit the poorest 40 percent as they depend more on public
services than the rest of the population. In sectors like primary education, agriculture, transport, ICT and
justice the Bank will follow other donors’ lead. (Annex 3 summarizes donors’ support to different
sectors.) Driven by its mandate, the Bank will continue to be comprehensive and strategic in analytical
work that helps set the development agenda for the PA and the donor community. Private sector job
creation will support shared prosperity through World Bank investments complemented by
IFC continuing its focus on financial and infrastructure sectors, and looking to expansion in other sectors
if the operating environment for the private sector improves and opportunities arise.
47.
Flexibility--along with a balance between short and medium term needs--will continue to
drive the Bank Group’s program. The Bank supports the long term structural reforms to build the
foundation for a strong Palestinian administration. The current environment of uncertainty makes it even
more important to continue this stream of support. Equally, the program will need to be flexible to adapt
to sudden changes in a very fragile operating environment. Project designs will be simple, with reliance
on Additional Financing to scale up assistance to bolster successful components of tested interventions.
IFC will use a mix of debt, equity and guarantees as instruments of engagement on the investment side.
48.
Following the NDP’s lead, the program will place increased attention on jobs. Unable to
directly create a significant number of jobs in the economy, the Bank and IFC will take follow-up actions
on the findings of the recently completed assessment of the investment climate. A programmatic dialogue
on job creation will continue during FY 15, and a private sector project under development will build on
the results of the Investment Climate Assessment and focus on encouraging job opportunities and
stimulating entrepreneurship, with a particular focus on youth and women.
13

49.
The Bank Group’s response to the Gaza situation is based on the same principles of
selectivity and flexibility. To accommodate the PA’s request for assistance to Gaza, the FY 15 proposed
program has been radically restructured. First an emergency supplemental financing for the latest DPG
will help finance the PA’s additional recurrent expenditures related to the Gaza situation, primarily in the
social sectors. In addition, as mentioned earlier, three emergency additional financings are proposed in
three sectors where the Bank has experience in Gaza: water, electricity and municipal services. Two
pipeline operations for health and wastewater treatment in Hebron will also be presented. While the PA
appreciates the Bank’s ability to re-program assistance, it has expressed serious concerns about the need
to postpone key operations in infrastructure, jobs as well as the planned DPG VII to next fiscal year,
given the limit on financing available in the trust fund. Without additional funds available for FY16, the
program will have to be significantly reduced even in the core sectors where the Bank is taking the lead.
IFC is exploring the possibility of structuring a lending facility with the banking sector that benefits from
a grant component essential to providing risk mitigation measures needed to provide access to finance for
the private sector in both in Gaza and the West Bank. IFC will leverage its engagement with the Bank of
Palestine, which has the largest portfolio exposure to the private sector in Gaza, and with Wataniya
Mobile Company, which is waiting for the necessary approvals and frequencies to be able to launch its
operations in Gaza.
B. Proposed Program
50.
Based on these principles and reflecting the PA’s priorities reflected in the NDP, the two pillars
of this strategy are:



Strengthen the institutions of a future state to ensure service delivery to citizens, aligned with
the governance and institution building, and social protection blocks of the NDP.
Support private sector led growth that increases employment opportunities, aligned with the
economic development and employment, and infrastructure blocks of the NDP.

The strategy builds on the key elements of MNA’s regional strategy (jobs, growth, inclusion,
and governance). For example, in the growth and governance areas the Bank will focus on state and
institution building through macro-fiscal strengthening and public financial management (pillars of the
ongoing series of Development Policy Grants) in order to free up resources for ensuring service delivery
and shared prosperity. On inclusion, the Cash Transfer projects will ensure social protection of the very
poor.

51.

52.
The Bank will continue to pursue a long-term development agenda while measuring interim
results. The challenge is to keep the focus on the longer term state and private sector building agendas,
while measuring interim indicators to ensure that the proposed engagement is on the right track. In the
consultations with private and public stakeholders, there is a continued call for the Bank Group to focus
on the big picture and the longer term development agenda through strategic analytical and advisory work
as well as strategic investments in reform and service delivery. At the same time, the high degree of
uncertainty in the program makes it essential to measure progress on a shorter time frame. IFC’s countercyclical role in supporting private investments into the Palestinian territories while other investors remain
on the sidelines is an indication of its role as a long-term investor. IFC will continue to play this role of
signaling the long-term potential of both territories, and partner with domestic and foreign investors
willing to endure the high short-term risks associated with investing there. Thus, the outcomes stated in
tables below are those interim ones that can be measured, but they form part of a longer term, more
strategic framework.

14

Pillar 1. Strengthen the institutions of a future state to ensure service delivery to citizens
53.
The ultimate goal of this pillar is to assist the PA improve delivery of services, and to help
Palestinians reap the benefits of the state building measures. In its 2011 report to the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, the World Bank concluded that Palestinian public institutions compare favorably with those
in the region and beyond. Under this pillar of the strategy, the Bank will help the PA ensure that this
success translates into improved services for all Palestinians. Our development policy grants will
continue to facilitate expanding the fiscal space for pro-poor and development expenditures, while a
series of specific measures will focus on three sub-goals. The sub-goals are restricted to what can be
measured in the brief period of this strategy but form a part of the longer terms state-building agenda that
is essential for a sustainable Palestinian society.
Table 3. Pillar 1 Outcomes and Areas of Engagement to Help Achieve Assistance Strategy Objectives

Areas of
engagement

Pillar 1. Strengthen the institutions of a future state to ensure service delivery to citizens
1.2 Increased
1.1 Improved fiscal
1.3 Improved access to
Proposed
transparency and
management with a focus on
services by the poor and
Outcomes
accountability in service
health and electricity sectors
marginalized.
delivery
Services delivery by local
Public Financial Management
Service Delivery by NGOs
governments
Service delivery by
Health sector expenditure
Cash Transfer
agencies at the apex level
Electricity sector expenditure

Public procurement

Water and sanitation in Gaza

Outcome 1.1: Improved fiscal management with a focus on health and electricity sectors
54.
Three strands of Bank assistance will help the PA achieve this first outcome of Pillar 1: general
strengthening of public financial management practice as well as targeted expenditure management in the
health and electricity sectors where savings maybe possible.
55.
The PA’s fiscal management practices will be strengthened. Being able to manage public
finances strengthens the PA’s ability to prevent a roll-back of the gains made in institution-building and
thereby losing what has been painstakingly achieved over the past years.

The Bank, along with the IMF and other partners, will support fiscal strengthening through
regular policy dialogue, annual development policy and investment operations and AAA. Particularly, the
sixth Development Policy Grant is supporting policies to boost internally collected revenues and
containment of the size of the wage bill.

The Bank is helping the PA analyze the cost efficiency and sustainability of public service
provision, in particular for education, health, electricity and social welfare services; and the fiscal
implications of internal reconciliation through the Bank's ongoing programmatic Public Expenditure
Review.

The Bank’s 2013 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment (PEFA),
conducted in partnership with donor partners, found progress in comprehensiveness (no extra budgetary
funds), transparency (budgets documents made public and containing a lot of information), controls (exante control by financial controllers for budget and compliance controls) and audit (SAACB methodology
and capacity, and recently built internal audit). Weaknesses identified in other areas will be strengthened,
in particular budget execution (no cash planning, arrears generating, no commitment control, see

15

monitoring indicator 1) and accounting/reporting (mostly on accuracy grounds despite timeliness of
monthly reports and near-GFS compliance).

The 2011 financial statements are yet to be issued, and there were a number of “qualifications” in
the 2010 financial statements audited in 2013. Financial reporting (see monitoring indicator number 2)
will be strengthened to better manage the costs and pricing of public service provision and move towards
better performance and value-for-money. The Bank will help further strengthen the capacity of the State
Audit and Administrative Control Bureau (SAACB), one of the best state audit institutions in the Arab
world.

The Bank coordinates its support to the public financial management agenda with other donor
partners. While helping strengthen the downstream side of the budget cycle (budget execution, GFMIS,
accounting and reporting), DfID will continue to support the budget preparation cycle (program budgeting
and performance), and the EU the internal and external audit functions.

Municipalities’ financial management capacity will be built through the ongoing second
Municipal Development Project by gradually rolling-out an Integrated Financial Management and
Information System in selected municipalities.
56.
The PA will become better at managing its health expenditures. In particular, expenditure for
treating patients outside the Palestinian system—usually in tertiary care—have grown more than ten times
between 2000 and 2011 (from 8,123 referrals in 2000 costing under US$10 million to 56,468 in 2011
costing US$125 million), and constituted 36 percent of MoH expenditures in 2011 and 40 percent in
2012. The referral system is plagued by weak management and old/inconsistent contracts with health care
providers outside of the Palestinian facilities and has resulted in accumulated unpaid bills to outside
providers of around US$18 million. In response to a request from the PA, a proposed TA project would
aim to help the MoH implement the policy recommendations from recent Bank-supported analysis and
covering areas that could potentially include: assessment of cost effectiveness of developing national
capacity for treatment against outside referrals for key conditions, technical assistance for rationalizing
and organizing referrals and the development of a Referral Manual, establishing a system for contract
management and in-service training for physicians (see monitoring indicator number 3).
57.
The PA will improve management of electricity expenditures. Non-payment of electricity bills
by end consumers as well as municipalities, village councils, and Distribution Companies has led to
increasing arrears owed to the Israel Electric Corporation (IEC) – the principal supplier of electricity to
the Palestinian territories. The Government of Israel deducts these arrears from the VAT that it collects on
behalf of the PA. The PA has introduced a unified electricity tariff, and the Bank’s ongoing projects will
consolidate supply of electricity from IEC through four major substations. An investment project under
development will help improve payments for electricity by implementing the recommendations identified
through the Bank’s ongoing analysis of electricity payments, reducing system losses, improving system
performance, continue to consolidate supply and, implement a broader range of energy efficiency
measures (see monitoring indicator 4). It will also help improve the PA’s energy security and control of
electricity supply by supporting renewable energy implementation. The push for cost recovery will need
to be suspended in the short term for Gaza, given the humanitarian crisis..
Outcome 1.2: Increased transparency and accountability in service delivery
58.
Three strands of Bank assistance will help the PA achieve this second outcome. First,
municipalities will adopt practices that make them more accountable. Second, agencies at the apex level
of the PA as well as NGOs will have improved transparency in their delivery of services. Third,
transparency in government-wide purchase of goods and services will be increased through continued
improvement of the procurement system.

16

59.
Local governments’ accountability in service delivery will be improved. Municipal
management practices for better municipal accountability and service delivery is being supported by the
Bank’s ongoing municipal development program (see monitoring indicator number 5). While (the larger)
municipalities have been strengthened and accessed funds for service delivery, smaller local government
units (LGUs) and Village Councils have not benefited from the ongoing support. Thus, an investment
project will strengthen capacity of small LGUs and Joint Service Councils (JSCs) in upgrading both their
technical capacity and efficacy for citizen engagement and gender inclusion. It will provide incentives for
small LGUs to coalesce and collaborate to jointly provide services such as solid waste collection and
transport, extension and/ or rehabilitation of existing water supply and sewage networks, rehabilitation of
inter-village roads.
60.
Service delivery and regulatory agencies at the apex level will become more transparent in
their transactions. The ongoing Second Land Administration project will assist the Palestinian Land
Authority (PLA) ensure efficient and transparent land registration operations (see monitoring indicator
number 6). The PLA, along with the Ministry of Public Works and Housing, the Municipal Development
and Lending Fund and the Ministry of Local Government will be strengthened as part of an investment
project to augment municipal capacity for integrated urban planning and increasing the supply of
affordable housing on a pilot basis in more densely populated areas. On the NGO side, the Bank’s
ongoing NGO project will incentivize NGOs delivering services to comply with the NGOs’ Code of
Conduct including financial reporting and hiring practices (see monitoring indicator number 7).
61.
The public procurement systems will be strengthened through the adoption of policy reform
actions supported by the series of Development Policy Grants and through a targeted investment project
under development. This will include institution building of the Higher Council for Public Procurement
Policies and the two central procurement entities (Central Tenders Department at MOPWH and General
Supplies Department of the Ministry of Finance), strengthening the capacity of the State Audit and
Administrative Control Bureau for carrying out procurement audits establishing the dispute review units,
establishing framework agreements, in particular for common-use goods and services, issuing sectorspecific national standard bidding documents(e.g. pharmaceuticals, textbooks, ICT); and putting in place
a framework for data collection, monitoring and performance bench marking of the procurement system
(see monitoring indicator number 8.)
Outcome 1.3: Improved access to services by the poor and marginalized.
62.
Three strands of Bank assistance will help the PA’s effort to extend public services to a greater
proportion of the poor and marginalized. First, the Bank will help strengthen NGOs’ service delivery.
Second, the Bank will help the PA target assistance to the most poor. Third, to alleviate the suffering in
Gaza, Bank interventions will focus on specific improvements to water supply and sanitation services.
63.
NGOs’ effectiveness in delivering services will be enhanced. Strong Palestinian charitable
organizations emerged in the 1960s in the absence of a state, and currently NGOs provide a wide array of
social services in health, agriculture, early childhood development, mental health, education, care for the
elderly, environment and services for people with special needs, often supplementing and augmenting
services provided by the PA. The Bank will continue to support institutionalization of a transparent and
effective system for identifying NGOs providing critical services, providing them with grants and targeted
capacity building and effectively monitoring the implementation of these activities (see monitoring
indicator number 9).
64.
Services to poor and marginalized communities will be further strengthened. The ongoing
Palestinian NGO project will provide grants to NGOs for social service delivery to poor and vulnerable
Palestinians in unserved and under-served areas. Through the ongoing Cash Transfer Project, the World
Bank, alongside the European Union, will mitigate the impact of the continued socio-economic crisis on a
17

subset of the extremely poor and most vulnerable households; and support the Palestinian Authority's
efforts to target assistance to the most poor (see monitoring indicator number 10.)
65.
Water and sanitation services will be improved in the Gaza strip. A significant shortage of
water services and a severe deterioration of public health are threatening the lives of Palestinians in Gaza,
especially of the poor who cannot afford to purchase water from private vendors. The situation in Gaza
was already serious before the recent conflict with the World Health Organization (WHO) estimating that
Gaza would run out of potable water by 2015. After the conflict, the PA-led assessment estimated that
more than 80 percent of the water wells were not functioning and about 1.2 million people lacked access
to water and sanitation services. In addition to ongoing projects, emergency project activities proposed for
additional financing will rehabilitate damaged water infrastructure to restore basic water supply and
wastewater services (see monitoring indicator number 11). The Bank’s interventions will help reduce the
amount of time and financial resources spent by households in Gaza to manage the relatively limited
supplies of water of variable quality. Wastewater treatment and disposal improvements will reduce the
contamination of the aquifer on which most Gazans depend for their water supply leading to positive
impacts on public health. Although less dire than in Gaza, water and wastewater services are inadequate
in the West Bank, with per capita water consumption well below WHO-guidelines and only 13 percent of
wastewater being treated. The Bank’s interventions will help improve water and wastewater services in
the Hebron Governorate and a cluster of villages located in the west Bethlehem governorate.
Pillar 2. Support private sector led growth that increases employment opportunities
66.
Sustainable economic growth and social progress is dependent on a vibrant private sector.
Private sector job creation is essential to support shared prosperity given the link between employment
and well-being. The NDP’s ambitious aim to increase employment opportunities by 600,000 during the
next ten years would require an annual growth rate of 10 percent, or four times the growth rate of 20132.
The World Bank is not engaged in some of the sectors identified in the NDP for selectivity reasons (e.g.
agriculture), nor will the World Bank Group’s initiatives lead to large scale job creation. Instead, the
Bank Group will focus on four areas within its comparative advantage:

Innovative approaches to job creation will be introduced by demonstrating untapped opportunities
in hitherto unexplored sectors; and continuing to strengthen the link between businesses and tertiary
education institutions so that graduates’ skills match the demands of the marketplace;

IFC’s investments will help spur economic development and provide jobs.

Infrastructure improvements in water, solid waste and energy will be supported. This will
improve the business climate and thus support private sector job creation, in addition to directly providing
employment for construction and maintenance. Such investments in improved service delivery also
support shared prosperity by disproportionally benefitting those in the bottom deciles of the income
distribution;

The financial sector will be broadened and deepened so that larger numbers of people have access
to financial services including insurance.

2

During the timetable of the (now-stalled) peace talks, several initiatives to boost the Palestinian economy had been announced.
The most significant of these is the Economic Initiative for Palestine, declared by US Secretary of State John Kerry. The
initiative was designed to empower and stimulate a large number of Palestinian and foreign investors to invest US$19 billion
over the upcoming six years in a broad package of investments in eight vital sectors: construction and construction materials;
water; agriculture; industry, tourism; information and communication technology; and energy.

18

Areas of
engagement

Table 4. Pillar 2 Outcomes and Areas of Engagement to Help Achieve Assistance Strategy Objectives
Pillar 2. To support private sector led growth that increases employment opportunities
2.1 Innovative
2.2 Infrastructure
2.3 Financial sector
Outcomes
approaches to job
improved to attract private
broadened and deepened
creation introduced
investment
Employment opportunities
Enabling environment for
for marginalized rural
Electricity supply
MSMEs
communities
Internet-based work
Telecom services
Mortgage finance
Industry-led workforce
Water supply including for
Investment insurance
development
irrigation
Outcome 2.1 Innovative approaches to job creation introduced
67.
Three strands of the Bank Group’s assistance will help the PA achieve this first outcome: identify
sectors that have the potential to generate jobs without requiring heavy investment, expand employment
opportunities that rely on technology, and closing the missing gap between skills that tertiary education
institutions build and what the industry needs.
68.
In marginalized rural areas, employment in tourism will be supported. Although both public
and private sectors are investing large amounts in developing the tourism industry, small communities in
rural areas are not benefiting from these investments. The Abraham Path is the longest trail in the West
Bank, attracting thousands of travelers. Combining walking in the West Bank with tourism and
hospitality in local communities there, experiential tourism has the potential to create employment
opportunities for homestay hosts, guides, transport providers, and local business owners. The Bank’s
ongoing project will support the development of walking trails, while demonstrating the employment
opportunities generated by experiential tourism in rural communities (see monitoring indicator number
12.)
69.
Technology driven entrepreneurship and innovation will be expanded. ‘Microwork’ (online
outsourcing) is one such area with significant potential to improve income generation opportunities and
employment—requiring workers to have only computers and internet access for participation. In other
parts of the world, this sector mainly employs those between the ages of 21 to 35 with a strong
participation of women. A Bank project under development would conduct training for youth and women
in online work and mobile computing; and provide training/education capacity in selected organizations,
while providing matching and seed grants for local online work providers, brokers and intermediaries to
launch online outsourcing (see monitoring indicator number 13). The Bank will also support higher
education institutions’ development of curricula for building skills to take on microwork jobs.
Tertiary education graduates’ skills will be more aligned to the market’s demands.
Acquiring these skills will prepare trained workers for the private sector to recruit while addressing young
Palestinians’ serious employment challenges. Unemployment rates among graduates from both university
and secondary education institutions are above 60 percent at the age of graduation with only a slow
decrease over time. As part of its Education For Employment (E4E) program, IFC is identifying areas
(mainly in banking and ICT) where targeted skills development will meet the market’s needs, develop
skills frameworks for these areas, establish public and private sector platforms to bridge the skills gap,
and advocate private sector investment in education, which could also create possibilities for IFC
investments. The Bank’s ongoing Education to Work Transition Project will continue to support

70.

19

transition of young Palestinians attending participating tertiary education institutions by fostering
partnerships between those educational institutions and employers in order to make study programs more
relevant to the needs of the labor market (see monitoring indicator number 14.)
Outcome 2.2 Infrastructure improved to attract private sector investments
71.
Energy supply will be increased, including through restoring damaged networks in
Gaza. Sustainability within the sector will also addressed, and energy security will remain a significant
focus – particularly through the development of renewable energy.

The ongoing Gaza Electricity Network Rehabilitation project will continue to rehabilitate and
expand the electricity networks in Gaza in order to improve reliability and performance. However,
Gaza’s electricity network was severely damaged during recent hostilities, affecting even basic levels of
electricity supply. Therefore, an emergency additional financing will finance reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the damaged electricity infrastructure in Gaza (see monitoring indicator number 15).

The ongoing Electric Utility Management project will continue to strengthen key energy sector
institutions to enhance the performance of the sector. A new operation, based on recent analysis of the
electricity sector’s contribution to net lending, will seek to support improved payment for electricity,
continue to consolidate electricity supply through Palestinian institutions, improve energy efficiency, and
to improve the overall fiscal sustainability of the sector.

The Bank will also continue to support increased energy security, particularly where energy
supply supports other basic service provision. This will focus primarily on the development of indigenous
energy resources, and in particular renewable energy. The development of a strategy for renewable
energy was supported by the Bank during the previous strategy period, and the PA’s Green Palestine
initiative (led by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Palestinian Energy Authority) aims to create both
high skill and low skill jobs from improved efficiencies in the use of natural resources. The Bank is also
supporting the private development of a biogas plant at the Zahrat Al-Finjan landfill that could generate
1.5 MW of electricity. Meanwhile, inadequate and unreliable power supply in Gaza places at risk the
operation of the sewage treatment plant constructed with Bank support. Thus, the Bank is assisting the
Palestinian Energy and Natural Resources Authority and the Palestinian Water Authority to confirm solar
photovoltaic technology as the most optimal and feasible power supply option for the sewage treatment
plant in North Gaza, and will continue to support the development of this option. If the opportunity arises,
IFC will also explore options of participating in the renewable energy sector, primarily through PPPs.
The Bank Group is also working together to increase private sector participation in the energy sector. IFC
is evaluating an investment opportunity in a new US$500 million 400MW power plant in Jenin, while the
World Bank is seeking funds for a partial risk guarantee to support the same project. This model of
support could also be expanded to a range of other smaller renewable energy investments in the West
Bank, and potentially also in Gaza. MIGA is considering support to equity investors of the power plant
through reinsurance mobilization.

Lastly, in the event that political constraints to the development of Gaza Marine gas are removed,
the Bank will seek to increase engagement in support of strong and transparent governance of the
Palestinian gas sector.
72.
The Palestinian telecommunications sector will be strengthened.

Currently, IFC is the lead arranger and manager of the US$125 million syndicated loan to
Wataniya Mobile Co., the second mobile operator in the Palestinian territories. It is also supporting the
company’s launch of its operations in Gaza, which is expected to improve communication services and
lower costs, as was witnessed in the West Bank. Service in Gaza is expected to double the number of the
company’s effective subscribers, which currently stands at more than half a million (see monitoring
indicator number 16).

20



The top telecom sector priorities are the allocation by Israel of adequate spectrum frequencies for
Palestinian mobile and broadband use, the establishment of an independent regulator along with the
strengthening of the regulatory framework to ensure competitive growth, increase private participation
and enable further job creation. Ongoing technical assistance from the World Bank is helping the PA
assess its telecommunications sector in comparative perspective along with prices, availability of services,
access and use, and the PA’s policies and regulations and main constraints hindering development and
growth of the sector (see monitoring indicator number 17).
73.
The water and wastewater management sector will be more organized, more capable of
securing water supply and rights for citizens, and materializing a fair distribution for all purposes.
Improvements to water supply, wastewater treatment will lower the costs of doing business for the private
sector, allow for reuse of waste water for irrigation and directly generate employment.

The Bank’s Gaza Water Supply and Sewage System Improvement Project and the Water Supply
and Sanitation Improvements for West Bethlehem Villages will improve water supply and wastewater
services to vulnerable communities.

To protect the underlying aquifer and supply irrigation water, effluent reuse from the Waste
Water Treatment Plant in North Gaza (supported by the AFD and the World Bank) will recover water to
irrigate agricultural land.

In partnership with AFD, EC, and USAID the Bank’s Hebron Regional Wastewater Management
Project (under development) will support Hebron municipality and the Palestinian Water Authority to
treat domestic wastewater from Hebron City (in a first phase) and other communities (in subsequent
phase) in order to make the treated effluent available for irrigation (see monitoring indicator number 18).

Additional Financing to the Water Sector Capacity-Building project will strengthen the capacity
of the Palestinian Water Authority and other stakeholders to more effectively plan, monitor, regulate, and
implement water sector development both in Gaza and the West Bank.
Outcome 2.3 Financial sector broadened and deepened.
74.
Three strands of the Bank Group’s assistance will help achieve this third outcome: increase the
potential of MSMEs to generate income, develop mortgage financing, and provide political risk insurance
to attract domestic and foreign investors.
75.
The enabling environment for Micro, Medium and Small Enterprises (MSMEs) will be
further developed.

A regional MSME TA facility will help enhance the capacity of MSMEs. The facility is jointly
managed by IFC and the World Bank and currently supports MSME finance and development across
seven countries in the MENA region.

On the advisory side, IFC will continue to work with client banks to develop their SME finance
products with a special focus on financing of women entrepreneurs.

Building on its successful microfinance investment in Faten, IFC is looking to double its
financing to the microfinance sector (see monitoring indicator number 19).

Following the PA’s recent approval of the Leasing Law, IFC will work with the Capital Markets
Authority to develop leasing regulations, help build the CMA’s capacity building and operationalize the
movable assets registry and continue its support the development of the Secured Transaction Law.

The Bank will help strengthen accounting capacity in general. In partnership with the Ministry of
Women's Affairs and the Palestinian Association of Certified Public Accountants, the Bank will train
women in book-keeping skills who will eventually provide bookkeeping services to MSMEs.

21

76.
Mortgage finance markets will be deepened by providing banks with financing, risk sharing
facilities and IFC’s advisory services. IFC’s work with the PA’s AMAL (Affordable Mortgage and
Loan) program is continuing, where origination guidelines were revised to be more in line with the
market. The Palestinian Monetary Authority is providing capacity building to banks through the training
program developed by IFC. IFC will continue to build on its existing portfolio of investments and
advisory projects in the financial sector, which includes an equity investment in the Bank of Palestine,
trade finance lines with three banks, and plans to explore opportunities to expand into Islamic Banking
(see monitoring indicator number 20).
77.
MIGA will continue to provide political risk insurance cover, while the Bank and IFC are
analyzing options and instruments for insuring investments. MIGA will seek to replenish the WB &G
IGTF, fully allocated now, to continue supporting private sector activity (see monitoring indicator
number 21). MIGA is also exploring reinsurance opportunities from regional institutions such as the Arab
Export Credit and Investment Insurance (Dhaman) and Islamic Cooperation for Insuring Investments and
Export Credit (ICIEC), as well as the private market. MIGA has recently established a trust fund to attract
investments in fragile and conflict states, which could be used to complement IGTF, though only to
foreign investors according to the terms of this trust fund.
C. Cross-cutting Themes in Program Implementation
78.
The program will be closely coordinated with development partners through the Local
Development Forum (LDF). The LDF includes representation from the PA as well as all donor and aid
agencies, meets roughly once every six months, and has been chaired by the Palestinian Prime Minister
since October 2007. In addition, a number of sectoral working groups have also been established, each
co-chaired by a donor and the relevant PA ministry or agency.
79.
The Bank Group will help build partnerships with the private sector. Recently donors have
shown greater interest in more coordinated support to private sector growth and job creation agenda, thus
increasing the activity of the LDF’s Private Sector Working Group. The public private partnership
supported by the Southern West Bank Solid Waste Management project (construction by the PA and
maintenance by a private operator) will serve as a model and reminder to seek similar opportunities
throughout the portfolio. As mentioned earlier, the Bank is seeking funds to provide partial risk guarantee
to the PA to provide comfort to private companies interested in investing in the energy sector while IFC is
exploring options for investment.
80.
Integration of women’s empowerment into operations will be stepped up. To enhance the
World Bank Group’s gender focus a comprehensive assessment of current and planned operational
activities was undertaken during the first half of 2014, a practical gender action plan was developed and is
being implemented across the portfolio. Enhancing female employment and making service delivery
responsive to women’s needs will drive projects’ design and implementation.

In the area of enhancing female employment, the ongoing programmatic jobs dialogue will
include workshops on addressing binding constraints to women’s employment opportunities. Women’s
school to work transition will be enhanced through the ongoing Education to Work Transition project.
Sources of livelihood for women will be created through pilot projects including the Abraham Path and
the Economic Development across Fragile Communities and the planned Online Outsourcing for Jobs and
Youth Empowerment. IFC will support programs to enhance women’s access to credit and female
entrepreneurship. Female entrepreneurship will also be supported through the Government Services for
Business Development project, which aims to deliver timely business development information, data and
services targeting women business owners.

22


In the area of making service delivery responsive to women’s needs, the Bank will include
measures to enhance women’s decision-making, design, and consumer voice in urban development,
energy and water sector projects. For example, the Second Municipal Development project will include a
female quota in decision-making committees of municipalities applying for funding. The Energy
Efficiency Action Plan (TA) will conduct quantitative and qualitative data collection to improve the
understanding of energy consumption behavior of women. The Gaza Water Supply & Sewage System
Improvement project includes a public awareness campaign targeting women as a subcomponent of the
project as women play a crucial role in water consumption. Various service delivery projects will also
collect women’s consumer feedback in citizen satisfaction surveys.
81.
Analytical and advisory activities will be strategically selected. The Bank’s analytical products
will continue to inform project design and analyze emerging challenges. Knowledge products will
respond to specific requests from the Palestinian Authority such as one recently received to propose an
institutional structure for excellence in science and its applications in industry. IFC’s advisory activities to
provide capacity building of private companies will be conducted with a view to improving access to
finance and strengthening the financial sector, as well as PPPs.
82.
All assistance for Gaza will continue to be provided through the Palestinian Authority.
Project implementation activities will be carried out through agencies of the PA such as utilities, higher
education institutions and NGOs. Only the designated PA officials will be authorized to withdraw funds
and sign off on the withdrawal applications. Disbursements for Gaza investment projects will continue to
adhere to the Bank’s Anti Money-Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorists (AML/ CFT)
Program. IFC’s engagement in Gaza’s financial and telecommunications sectors will be through existing
clients.
D. Communications and Outreach
83.
The Bank Group will engage counterparts in the Palestinian Authority and development
partners in all stages of preparation of major products. The Bank Group will increase its reliance on
the internet to increase the availability of knowledge products both locally and internationally and in a
timely manner. However, face–to-face meetings will continue—not only with counterparts in the PA but
also in response to specific requests from the media, NGOs and individuals, many of whom follow the
Bank’s knowledge products on the role of economics in the peace process. Partnership with local
universities has been helpful for disseminating our products and the Bank will strengthen its relations
with these academic institutions more systematically. Task teams will engage upstream with ECR staff
for the most effective communication strategy.

VI.

RISKS

84.
The Bank Group’s operating environment is one of high risk. The recent Gaza crisis is a
reminder of how worsening security challenges have the potential to derail program implementation (as it
did in 2007-08). During July and August, 2014, the Bank’s office in Gaza within the UN compound had
to be closed for 63 days, and Bank staff and their families had to remain without electricity and water. To
mitigate this risk, the Bank has a resident security advisor who is in continuous contact with the UN’s
security system. The program’s Emergency Response and Business Continuity Plan is reviewed and
updated frequently.
85.
Program implementation is prone to periods of slow-down. Implementation of projects in
Gaza is adversely affected by conflict such as during the recent eruption of violence. Conflict leads to
declining private sector confidence and thus impedes IFC’s investments. To mitigate this risk, political
23

and security developments are monitored routinely for the Bank Group to remain alert to any situation
that may require adjustments to its program. The Bank draws upon its experience during 2000-2004, and
again during 2006 to 2008 when international assistance to the Palestinian territories stalled. Having only
one channel of providing assistance is risky, so in addition to the Palestinian Authority, the Bank will also
partner with local communities, NGOs, utilities and educational institutions that can provide continuity of
support in the event of program disruption due to violence. IFC will continue to play its countercyclical
and development role in providing long-term financing not otherwise available. In the event that the
investment climate worsens significantly and hampers IFC’s business development in the areas
highlighted in this Assistance Strategy, IFC—as it has in the past—will resort to engaging through
advisory support while focusing on strong portfolio management to mitigate risks on its balance sheet.
86.
Continued blockade of Gaza impedes investment projects from achieving their objectives.
In this regard, maintaining good quality of the Bank’s operational portfolio that is located in Gaza
remains a challenge. A number of project implementation units rely on satellite staff in Gaza to supervise
operations there, and communication between the West Bank and Gaza staff can be extremely difficult.
Furthermore, the supply of goods, especially those required for larger infrastructure operations, requires
an additional layer of support from the World Bank. For bringing into Gaza materials required to
implement Bank-funded projects in the Gaza, the World Bank coordinates routinely with Israel’s
COGAT, the body tasked with managing civilian affairs in the Palestinian territories, to explain how the
project inputs will be used. It is also exploring the possibility of collaborating with the UN Relief and
Works Agency, which has a framework agreement with the Government of Israel for moving donorsupplied goods, to transport project materials from the border with Israel to the project site. The access of
materials will be essential also for the reconstruction of Gaza from the recent conflict
87.
A recent slow-down in the progress of public financial management reform placed risks on
previous gains in this area. The Bank’s PEFA Assessment in 2013, conducted in partnership with donor
partners, found some weaknesses including in accounting/reporting—mostly on accuracy grounds
including a difference on 2013 monthly fiscal reports, audit qualifications in the 2010 financial statements
(audited in 2013), while the 2011 financial statements are not yet issued. To mitigate the risk, the Bank
will monitor PFM arrangements and, along with donor partners, support implementation of the Action
Plan issued in October 2013. The Bank is providing technical assistance (TA) on downstream budget
performance (execution, accounting/reporting) while the other donors (DfID and EU) are helping on
budget preparation and audit. During the past year, the Bank has fielded six TA missions on cash
planning and accounting/reporting and will continue to provide support in this area. In partnership with
the EU, the Bank will help the PA to implement an accounting manual under development, and strengthen
the accounting/reporting practices.
88.
Institution-strengthening, central to the Bank’s assistance, is threatened by the PA’s
continuing fiscal challenges. The Bank has engaged in this long term development agenda since 1992.
But the PA remains dependent upon high and unpredictable levels of aid. Donor fatigue and reduction in
donor assistance is a significant source of risk to PA’s finances and the Palestinian economy as a whole.
Fiscal pressures put at risk the provision of public services by the Palestinian Authority (the first pillar of
this assistance strategy) and make structural reforms hard to undertake. The Bank mitigates against this
risk by emphasizing in all development forums the need for donors to maintain their support, without
which the significant gains in strengthening of public institutions will be lost.

24

ANNEX 1. RESULTS MONITORING FRAMEWORK
Outcomes influenced by
Outcome Indicators
the program
Pillar 1. Strengthen the institutions of a future state to ensure service delivery to citizens

World Bank Group Program

PA’s development goals in the National Development Plan and (AS Outcomes that will support each goal)
More effective, efficient and transparent management and allocation of public service delivery (Outcome 1.1 and Outcome 1.2)
Local government units are more capable of better public service delivery (outcome 1.2)
A rights-based, gender-sensitive, and a more inclusive, integrated and sustainable social protection system to alleviate poverty, marginalization and social
exclusion (outcome 1.3)
1. PEFA indicator 16(i) on cash flow planning and monitoring
Ongoing
--Development Policy Grant VI, World Bank
Baseline: Score D (2013)
--Public Expenditure Review, World Bank (ESW)
Target: Improved score (2016)
--Supreme Audit Institutions’ Capacity Building,
2. The PA’s Financial Statements up to 2013 prepared. (Yes/ No)
World Bank, World Bank (TA)
--Electricity Sector Contribution to Net Lending, World
Baseline: No (they have been prepared up to 2011)
Bank (TA)
Target: Yes (2016)
-- Audit Capacity Development, World Bank (TA)
Residual and Net Domestic Financing Reconciliation,
Outcome 1.1 Improved
World Bank (TA)
fiscal management with a
3. Protocols and guidelines for medical referrals (to facilities other than
focus on electricity and
Planned
Palestinian ones) developed and complied with. (Yes / No)
health sectors
--Gaza Emergency Response Development Policy
Grant VI Supplemental Financing
Baseline: No (2014)
--Public Financial Management Capacity in Local
Target: Yes (2016)
Governments, World Bank (TA)
4. Data being tracked on non-payment of electricity bills, and key
--Health Systems Quality and Efficiency Improvement
performance indicators encompassing full revenue position of
Project, World Bank
electricity Distribution Companies being measured. (Yes / No)
--Electricity Sector Performance Improvement Project ,
World Bank
Baseline: No (2014)
Target: Yes (2016)
5. Municipalities that apply social accountability measures – at least
Ongoing
Outcome 1.2: Increased
two public disclosure mechanisms. (percentage of whole)
--Second Municipal Development Project, World Bank
transparency and
--NGO Project IV, World Bank
accountability in service
Baseline:68 (2014)
--Second Land Administration Project, World Bank
delivery
Target: 75 (2016)
--Development Policy Grant VI
-- Second Municipal Development Project Emergency
Additional Financing




25

Outcomes influenced by
the program

Outcome Indicators

6.

World Bank Group Program

Land transactions processed per month by the PLA’s regional
offices. (Numbers)

Baseline: 2170 (2014)
Target: 28000 (2016)
7. NGOs delivering public services accredited through the Code of
Conduct compliance system (number)

Planned
--Gaza Emergency Response Second Municipal
Development Project Additional Financing
--Local Governance and Services Improvement Project,
World Bank
--Modernizing Public Procurement Project, World
Bank
Local Government Performance, World Bank (TA)

Baseline: 25 (2014)
Target: 50 (2016)
8. The PA’s single portal public procurement website --through which
at least 50% of public procuring entities post their procurement
plans, notices, contract awards --is functioning. (Yes / No)
Baseline: No (2014)
Target: Yes (2016)
9. Poor, vulnerable and marginalized population with access to social
and economic services delivered by NGOs. (Number)

Outcome 1.3: Improved
access to services by the
poor and marginalized.

Baseline: 37260 (2014)
Target: 44260 (2016)
10. Beneficiaries of the Cash Transfer Program of which in the lowest
quintile of poverty (number)
Of which female headed (number)
Baseline: 18999, 26000 (2014)
Target: 56000, 48000 (2016)
11. Population in Gaza benefitting from restored access to water and
waste water services (number)
Baseline: 0 (2014)
Target: 1000000 (2016)

26

Ongoing:
--Cash Transfer Project
--NGO project IV
--Water Supply and Sewage System Improvement
Project
-- Additional Financing for Water Supply and Sewage
Systems Improvement
Planned:
--Gaza Emergency Response Water Supply & Sewage
Systems Improvement Project Additional Financing
--Benefits for Marginalized Population in Palestine,
World Bank (TA)

Outcomes influenced by
Outcome Indicators
the program
Pillar 2. To support private sector led growth that increases employment opportunities

World Bank Group Program

PA’s development goals in the National Development Plan and (AS Outcomes that will support each goal)
 Investments creating employment opportunities have increased (Outcome 2.1)
 Energy secured and supplied to consumers in sufficient quantities, at reasonable prices (outcome 2.2)
 A water and wastewater management sector that is more organized and more capable of securing water rights for citizens and materializing a fair distribution
for all purposes (outcome 2.2)
 National productive capacity and the competitiveness of Palestinian businesses have improved (Outcome 2.1 and Outcome 2.3)
12. Job creation with a particular focus on women piloted through
experiential tourism in marginalized rural communities along the
Abraham Path (Yes/No).
Baseline: No (2014)
target: Yes (2016)
Outcome 2.1 Innovative
approaches to job
creation

13. Training in online outsourcing and digital literacy piloted (Yes/No)
Baseline: No (2014)
Target: Yes (2016)
14. Electricity distribution network reconstructed (km)
Baseline: 0 (2014)
Target: 405 (2016)

15. Mobile phone connections (number).

Outcome 2.2
Infrastructure improved to
attract private investment

Baseline: 500,000
Target: 1,000,000

16. Assessment of the telecommunications sector in the regional context
with respect to prices, availability of services, access and use (Yes,
No)

27

Ongoing
-- Investment Climate Assessment, World Bank (ESW)
-- Dialogue for Palestinian Job Creation, World Bank
-- Abraham Path Project Economic Development
across Fragile Communities, World Bank
-- Education to Work Transition Project, World Bank
--IFC’s MSME investments and TA
Planned
-- Education for Employment engagement including
potential for investment, IFC
-- Online Employment Project, World Bank
-- Enterprise and Job Opportunities Initiation Project,
World Bank
-- Education Component of Microwork, World Bank
(ESW)

Ongoing
-- Electric Utilities Management Project, World Bank
-- Gaza Electricity Network Rehabilitation Project,
World Bank.
-- North Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment Project,
World Bank
-- Wataniya Palestine Telecommunications Project, IFC
-- Telecom sector assessment, World Bank (ESW)
-- Water Supply and Sewage System Improvement
Project, World Bank

Outcomes influenced by
the program

Outcome Indicators

World Bank Group Program

Baseline: No (2014)
Target: Yes (2016))
17. Wastewater from the North Gaza Sewage Treatment Plant collected
and treated in accordance with Palestinian environmental standards
(M3 / day)

-- Gaza Solid Waste Improvement Project, World Bank

Baseline: 0 (2014)
Target: 35000 M3/ day (2016)
18. Active MSME borrowers (number)
Of which women (percentage)
Baseline: 5688 (2014)
Target: 12229 (2016)
Of which
women (55% )
19. Mortgage volume (US$ amount)
Baseline:US$4.5 million (2014)
Target: US$30 million (2016)
20. MIGA political risk guarantee (million US$)

Outcome 2.3 Financial
sector broadened and
deepened.

Baseline: US$18.3 (2014)
Target: US$30 (2016)
21. Job creation with a particular focus on women piloted through
experiential tourism in marginalized rural communities along the
Abraham Path (Yes/No).
Baseline: No (2014)
target: Yes (2016)

Planned
-- Gaza Emergency Response Electricity Network
Rehabilitation Project Additional Financing
-- Energy for Gaza Sewage Treatment Plant Project,
World Bank
-- Sustainable water Supply Program, World Bank
-- Hebron Wastewater Management Project, World
Bank
--IFC and World Bank engagement in Jenin Power
Plant.

Ongoing
-- SME Banking for Women Advisory with Bank of
Palestine, IFC
-- Faten investment and TA support, IFC
-- AMAL investment, IFC
-- West Bank & Gaza Leasing Development, IFC
-- West Bank & Gaza Secured Lending Project, IFC
-- Quds Bank, IFC
-- MIGA operations
-- Innovation Finance, World Bank (ESW)
-- Partial Risk Guarantee for IPP on Gas-fired
electricity generation
Planned
--Potential repeat investment with Faten, IFC
--Capital Markets Authority, IFC TA

28

ANNEX 2. DONOR FUNDS THAT COMPLEMENT THE BANK’S GRANTS AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
Note: does not include parallel financing
Project #

Project Name

Trust Fund #

Trust Fund Name

TF Status
(Active or
Closed)

Donor Name

Net Grant
Amount
(US$ 000)

Gramts
TF071607

Palestinian Reform and Development
Multi-Donor Trust Fund

Active

AusAid, Finland-MoFA, NorwayMoFA, UK-DFID, France-MoFA,
State of Kuwait, Japan (Canada-CIDA
and Poland are former donors)
Partnership for Water and Urban
Development (PWUD)

1,226,999.87
(Disbursed to
Date)

P127163

Second Municipal
Development Project

TF016476

Second Municipal Development
Project

Active

P074595

North Gaza Emerg.
Sewage Treatment

TF057595

North Gaza Emergency Sewage
Treatment

Active

EU-Commission of the European
Communities

7,831.02

TF056186

Swedish Trust Fund for North Gaza
Emergency Sewage Treatment

Closed

Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency (SIDA)

6,684.25

TF016501

Third Additional Financing for the
North Gaza Emergency Sewage

Active

Partnership for Water and Urban
Development (PWUD)

5,000.00

TF057109

Belgian Trust Fund for North Gaza
Emergency Sewage Treatment

Active

Belgium - Directorate General for
Development Cooperation (DGDC)

4,984.67

TF017221

NGEST Solar Power Feasibility
Study

Active

Partnership for Water and Urban
Development (PWUD)

TF013714

Second Land Administration Project
Co-Financing TF

Active

Finland-MoFA

P105403

Second Land
Administration

29

25,800.00

100.00

4,926.70

P117443

GZ. Water Sector
Capacity Building

TF015756

Water Sector Capacity Building cofinancing fund

Active

Partnership for Water and Urban
Development (PWUD)

1,000.00

P105404

Southern West Bank
Solid Waste
Management

TF090646

Second Solid Waste and
Environment Management Project

Closed

Japan – Ministry of Finance

TF014530

PID MDTF Program and TF
Management Fund

Active

Partnership for Water and Urban
Development (PWUD)

70.00

TF012005

West Bank & Gaza # 10186 Capital
Markets Devt. Ph. 2

FIRST- Financial Sector Reform
Strength Initiative

195.56

PPIAF- Public-Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility – Multi-Donors

161.30

385.00

TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
P131009

WBG # 10186
Capital Markets
Devt. Ph. 2

Active`

ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK
P129463

Municipal Finance
III

TF011762

WB&G Improving Revenue
Generation Policies and Framework
in West Bank and Gaza

30

Active

ANNEX 3. SUMMARY OF DONORS’ ASSISTANCE IN DIFFERENT SECTORS

Agriculture
Education
Energy
Environment
Extractives (oil,
gas, mining)
Gender
Governance,
service delivery
Health
ICT &Telecom
Justice/Security
Private Sector
Development
Public Fin
Management
Social
Protection
Tourism
Transport
Trade
Urban dev’t
and solid waste
Water &
Sanitation

31

UAE

USAID/USA

UN Systems

WB

Turkey

Switzerland

Sweden

Spain

South Korea

Saudi Arabia

Russia

Portugal

Qatar

Oman

Netherlands

Norway

Kuwait

KfW/Germany

Italy

IsDB

Ireland

India

JICA/Japan

GCC

Finland

EU

EC

Egypt

Denmark

DfID/UK

China

Canada

Belgium

Austria

Australia

Algeria

AFD/France

Sector

GTZ/Germany

(Shaded blocks represent development partners’ activity in the sector)

ANNEX 4. SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND
MANAGEMENT
As Of Date 9/29/2014

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
a
Number of Projects Under Implementation
b
Average Implementation Period (years)
a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
e
Disbursement Ratio (%)
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2012

2013

2014

2015

16
2.7
6.3
6.2
18.8
36.8
42.2

17
2.7
0.0
0.0
11.8
20.7
46.7

16
3.2
18.8
16.0
18.8
16.0
30.1

16
3.4
18.8
15.9
18.8
15.9
7.0

Since FY
80
42
0.0

Last Five
FYs
10
0.0

29.3
0.0

20.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

32

ANNEX 5. BANK OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO
Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Original Amount in
US$ Millions

Supervision Rating
Project
ID

Project Name

Developm
ent
Objective
s

P105404

GZ- Southern West Bank Solid Waste Mgt

P084461

GZ-Electric Utility Management

P116199

Disbursements

a/

Implementa
tion
Progress

Fiscal
Year

GRANT

S

HS

2009

12.00

0.20

0.20

S

S

2008

14.50

2.10

-0.40

GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab.

S

S

2012

8.00

5.19

1.69

P121648

GZ-Gaza Solid Waste Management

S

S

2014

10.00

9.61

-0.19

P074595

GZ-North Gaza Emerg. Sewage Treatment

MU

MU

2005

26.80

9.00

-10.00

P117444

GZ-Palestinian PNGOIV

S

S

2011

7.00

0.02

4.12

-0.86

P105403

GZ-Second Land Administration

MS

MU

2012

3.11

0.11

2.16

0.32

P127163

GZ-Second Municipal Development Project

S

S

2013

35.80

24.22

-9.83

P117443

GZ-Water Sector Capacity Building

MS

MS

2011

4.00

0.93

-0.07

P118560

GZ:Econ/Regulatory Institution-Building

MS

MS

2010

3.70

0.92

0.92

P126586

GZ:Government Services for Business Dev.

MS

MU

2012

3.00

2.04

0.59

P111394

S

S

2010

5.00

1.39

1.39

S

S

2013

6.40

2.54

P147687

GZ:Teacher Education Improvement Project
Water Supply & Sewage System
Improvement
WBG - PRDP Support VI

#

#

2014

40.00

P129861

West Bank & Gaza Ed.-to-Work Transition

S

S

2012

6.50

4.70

0.76

P119307

West Bank and Gaza Cash Transfer Project

S

S

2011

20.00

4.77

-5.23

0.27

73.90

-64.58

11.37

P101289

Overall Result

205.81

33

Cancel.

0.13

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Rev'd

2.10

9.00

ANNEX 6. IFC’S COMMITTED AND DISBURSED OUTSTANDING INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO

34

