Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 77630-HR

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
FOR THE PERIOD FY14-FY17
June 27, 2013

Croatia Country Office
Central Europe and Baltic Countries
Europe and Central Asia Region
The International Finance Corporation
Europe and Central Asia
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate as of May 17, 2013)
Currency Unit = Croatian Kuna (HRK)

US$1.00

=

5,870609HRK

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytical and Advisory Activities

IMF

International Monetary Fund

BiH

Bosnia and Herzegovina

INTOSAI

International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions

CTA

Croatian Tax Administration

IPSAS

International Public Sector Accounting Standards

CEB

Council of Europe Development Bank

IT

Information Technology

CEE

Central and Eastern European

JASPERS

Joint Assistance to Support Projects in European Regions

CFAA

Country Financial Accountability Assessment

JEREMIE

Joint European Resources for Micro to Medium Enterprises

CNB

Croatian National Bank

JPR

Joint Portfolio Review

CPAR

Country Procurement Assessment Report

LTO

Large Taxpayer Office

CPS

Country Partnership Strategy

M&E

Monitoring and Evaluation

DG ECFIN

Directorate General for Economic & Financial Affairs

MAP

Mediterranean Action Plan

DPL

Development Policy Loan

MDG

Millennium Development Goal

EIA

Environmental Impact Assessment

MIGA

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

EBRD

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

MoF

Ministry of Finance

EC

European Commission

MRDEUF

Ministry of Regional Development and EU Funds

ECA

Europe and Central Asia

NPL

Non-Performing Loan

EIB

European Investment Bank

OECD

Organization for Economic Co-Operation & Development

ERDPL

Economic Recovery Development Policy Loan

PDO

Project Development Objectives

ERP

Economic Recovery Program

PEP

Pre-Accession Program

ESI

EU Structural and Investment Fund

PforR

Program for Results

ESW

Economic and Sector Work

PPA

Project Preparation Advance

EU

European Union

PPP

Public Private Partnership

FDI

Foreign Direct Investments

RAS

Reimbursable Advisory Services

FMIS

Financial Management and Information System

R&D

Research and Development

FY

Fiscal Year

SDP

Social Democratic Party

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

SEA

Strategic Environmental Assessment

GEF

Global Environment Facility

SEE

South Eastern Europe

HBOR

Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development

SME

Small and Medium Enterprise

HBS

Household Budget Survey

SOE

State Owned Enterprise

HRK

Croatia Kuna

TA

Technical Assistance

HZ

Croatian Railways

TBC

Tuberculosis

IBRD

International Bank for Reconstruction & Development

TRE

Treasury

ICT

Information and Communication Technology

UN

United Nations

IFC

International Financial Corporation

VAT

Value Added Tax

IFI

International Financial Institution

WBG

World Bank Group

IIfomaioTchogIBRD
IFC
Vice President:
Director:
Task Team Leader:

Philippe H. Le Houerou
Mamta Murthi
Hongjoo J. Hahm
I

MIGA

Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Tomasz Telma
George Konda
I

Per KjNellerhaugo

Michael Wormser
Ravi Vish
Franciscus Johannes Linden
f

L

Table of Contents
I.
II.
II.A.

Introduction....................
Country Context and Development Agenda
................................
Social and Political Context.........................................

1
2
2

II.B.

Recent Economic Developments and Poverty Profile..........................

3

II.C.

Development Challenges and Opportunities

7

.............................

II.C.I.

Fiscal Consolidation, Reformed Social Welfare, and Improved Competitiveness....... 7

II.C.2.

Governance, Climate Change and Gender

.....................

.........

8

III.
III.A.

World Bank Group Engagement Strategy
.....................
Government Program and Medium Term Strategy
........

......... 10
............... 10

III.B.

Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy

............... 12

........

III.B. 1. Lessons from CPS Completion Report and Stakeholder Consultations .
III.B.2. Overview of World Bank Group Partnership Strategy
III.B.3.

..........

......... 12
........... 13

Engagement Areas, supported by Lending and Non-Lending Activities ....

III.C.

Implementing the FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy

..... 14

....................... 25

III. C. 1. Financial Envelope.....................................

......... 25

III.C.2. Partnership and Donor Coordination

.................................

26

III.C.3. Managing Program Implementation

..........................

26

IV.

Managing Risks

..........................................

Annex 1: Results Matrix

..... 29

......................
...................

Annex 2: Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report for FY09-FY13 ..............
Annex 3: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .....
Annex 4: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

31
38

..... 64

.....................

Annex 5: Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio..................

65
66

Tables, Figures and Boxes
Table
Table
Table
Table

1:
2:
3:
4:

Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

Key Macroeconomic Indicators (2009-2015)...................5.......5
Trends in Poverty and Inequality, 2008-2012
.....................
......... 6
2013 Economic Program of Croatia - Targets .............................
10
Indicative lending program for FY14-15
................................ 25

1:
2:
3:
4:

Recent Economic Developments (2008-2012)............................
Coverage (provisions as % share of NPLs)
...............................
Activity rates by gender ......................
................
Unemployment rates by gender......................9....
............

Box 1: 2013 Economic Program of Croatia............................................

4
6
99......
9
11

This FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy was prepared by Hongjoo Hahm, Ljiljana Tarade, Vanja Frajtic, Ivan
Kusen, Sanja Madzarevic-Sujster, Eric Manes, George Konda, Magdalena Soljakova and Per Kjellerhaug. The
team would like to acknowledge the contributions of Elisabetta Capannelli, Gallina Andronova Vincelette, Nina
Arnhold, Isfandyar Zaman Khan, Donato De Rosa, Manuel Marino, Matija Laco, Franciscus Johannes Linden,
Natasa Vetma, Vera Dugandzic, Nurul Alam, and Antonia Viyachka. In addition, the CPS benefitted from the
guidance and advice of Livia Benavides from LAC.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY14-17
REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
I.

Introduction

1.
On July 1, 2013, Croatia will crown 20 plus years of economic and social progress
since declaring independence by becoming the 28th Member State of the European Union
(EU). The demanding negotiations, launched in 2005 and concluded six years hence, were sealed
by the December 2011 signing of the EU accession treaty. The EU accession presents a
remarkable opportunity to address Croatia's many needs, by providing strong impetus to adopt
reforms, harmonizing legislation with the EU acquis communautaire and upon accession,
accessing EU Structural and Cohesion Funds amounting to more than 3 percent of GDP per year
to help in areas such as transport, environment and innovation.
2.
Despite being one of the richest World Bank borrowers, Croatia is facing significant
challenges. In its fifth year of recession and affected by the global and Eurozone crisis,
Croatia is hard pressed to demonstrate more robust progress in fiscal consolidation.
Recent credit rating downgrades in spite of a strong revenue performance in 2012 constitute a
tangible sign that sustained fiscal adjustment through microeconomic reforms at the sector level
is a priority. In parallel, the need for better resilience to external shocks, improved private sector
competitiveness and strong EU membership will also define Croatia's development strategy
during the next decade. The risks to the strategy are significant as any delay in reform would
hinder expected recovery and macroeconomic stabilization on the eve of Croatia's accession.
3.
The FY14-17, Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) aims to assist Croatia's
convergence with the EU through an engagement that is focused on key reform-based
outcomes, adjusted according to achievements and changing needs. For the World Bank
Group (WBG), priority will be placed on aspects of the Europe 2020 'smart, sustainable and
inclusive growth' strategy and the Government's new reform agenda that focus on the
fundamentals of economic management, state institutions, business environment, and
responsibility toward shared regional assets. If Croatia is to convert the opportunity of increased
public funds into better public projects, attention will also be needed to prepare Croatia's public
sector systems meet the EU requirements for funds absorption. Accordingly, three thematic areas
comprise the strategic pillars and form the basis of the results framework: (i) fiscal adjustment
through reforms at the sector level, (ii) innovation and trade competitiveness for growth and
shared prosperity, and (iii) helping maximize the economic benefits of becoming an EU member
state.
4.
While maintaining its focus on specific outcomes, the CPS embodies an evolution in
the WBG's partnership along two dimensions - the nature of Bank assistance and the
instruments to use. Bank assistance would gradually turn its focus away from funding projects
and towards technical assistance to build institutional capacity to better absorb EU Funds and
implement structural reforms. Second, the type of instruments will evolve as well. While
development policy loans (DPL) will continue to convene and underpin major reform initiatives,
public investment support will increasingly be results-based, analytical and advisory activities

1

(AAA) engagement will increasingly be offered on a reimbursable basis, and private sector
support will increasingly be non-sovereign based. This evolution would be a significant
challenge for Croatia but is in line with the change of relationship which has occurred in other
borrowing EU member states.
5.
The risks to the CPS result outcomes are significant both in terms of impact and
probability and will need to be closely monitored in a program framework. Croatia's
economy is exposed to the shocks of global adjustment and European deleveraging through
multiple transmission mechanisms. The trade in goods and services which accompanies Croatia's
position as a gateway has been badly affected, as have Croatia's export industries that rely on
buoyant external demand. At the same time, the shrinking balance sheets of large European
banking institutions will indirectly affect the availability of loanable funds through their
subsidiaries in Croatia, particularly as the level of Croatian non-performing loans (NPL) rise.
Therefore, implementing the comprehensive reform packages is critical to the achievement of the
outcomes envisioned under the CPS. Delivery of any reforms in Croatia requires a degree of
coordination across sectors and among various levels of government which could be difficult to
achieve despite all invested efforts. EU memberships will provide great opportunity but the
tendency toward policy complacency will be equally strong.
6.
Without implementation of the key sectoral reforms, fiscal consolidation would be
difficult and could negatively affect DPLs. In that case the WBG program would scale back to
results-based lending, some sector investments and a program of AAA, all of which would be
gradually replaced with reimbursable advisory services (RAS). On the other hand, overcoming
the risks and implementing the package of sector reforms would not only enable a program of
DPLs and strengthen creditworthiness, but it would also enhance the International Financial
Corporation (IFC) lending program.

II.
II.A.

Country Context and Development Agenda

Social and Political Context

7.
The coalition Government, led by the Social Democratic Party (SDP), was endorsed
by the Croatian Parliament in December 2011 and now maintains a stable majority in
parliament. The key guiding documents for its work are (i) the Government Program for 20112015 and (ii) the Structural Reform Matrix adopted in August 2012. As a central part of the
program, the Government proposed to implement budgetary and economic reforms which are
increasingly met with opposition by trade unions, public sector employees and workers adversely
impacted by privatization and industry closures. With the positive impact from these reforms
back loaded to the medium-term along with weak near term prospects of economic recovery,
public discontent may increase and slow down Government's reform efforts.
8.
The Government reform efforts face a number of implementation difficulties. To
date, Croatia's economic and political reforms have been driven in large part by a need to engage
in the complex processes involved in preparing for EU membership. As a new Member State,
Croatia will assume additional responsibilities and needs to ensure adequate pace of reforms. The
administrative capacity for effective policy design and implementation of complex reforms
presents one of the most difficult tasks for Croatia, as it tries to absorb a seven-fold increase in
EU funds as compared to the pre-accession period.

2

II.B.

Recent Economic Developments and Poverty Profile

9.
Four years of recession has resulted in an over ten percent reduction in output in
Croatia. Like other countries in the region, the global financial crisis adversely impacted the
economy through multiple transmission mechanisms, including trade and finance. As economic
conditions deteriorated amid the weak external demand, lower confidence in households and
firms led to a decline in personal consumption and investment. Export growth remained equally
slow as some of the most important and technologically advanced exporters - including
shipbuilding and metals - witnessed significant declines. The bright spot - a robust tourism
industry which grew by almost 5 percent in real terms - was not enough to offset the economy's
broad based decline.
10.
Although the recession's initial impact on employment was modest, the pace of job
loss accelerated. Total registered employment fell by more than eleven percent over the past
four years, with almost 190,000 jobs lost in construction, trade and manufacturing. Registered
unemployment rate stood at around 21 percent while the survey-based rate stood at 15.8 percent
in December 2012 - the second highest among all EUIO member states. Importantly, broader
indicators of labor market are not improving as labor participation continues to be the lowest
among all countries in EU.
11.
Deteriorating public finances resulted in annual deficits and a rise in public debt
ratios. Following fiscal deficits, on average, higher than 5.5 percent of GDP (once adjusted for
the shipyards' guarantees), the new Government was able to reverse the trend in 2012 with a
reduction in the deficit to around 3.8 percent of GDP. This improvement in 2012 was a result of
increased revenues, attributable to the VAT hike and improved tax compliance, along with some
reduction in subsidies, maintenance and capital spending. However, the achievement was
accompanied by overruns in the wage bill and pension/health care spending, which had to be
offset by squeezing capital spending.
12.
Despite the strong revenue achievement in 2012, the fiscal outlook for 2013 could
lead to a reversal in the 2012 fiscal gains. Both S&P (December 2012) and Moody's (January
2013) downgraded Croatia's credit rating to a speculative grade. The Government subsequently
adopted budget revision on March 21, 2013. The revised 2013 fiscal deficit amounts to 3.6
percent of GDP. However, without additional policy measures, both expenditure-based fiscal
rule (requiring an annual 1 percentage point reduction in spending until the primary balance is
reached) as well as the statutory public debt limit of 60 percent of GDP are likely to be breached
by end-2013. The debt to GDP ratio has already reached 69 percent when including publicly
guaranteed debt.
13.
Lower consumer demand and sluggish economic activity, while relieving some
pressure on external balances, is equally harming prospects for employment and sustained
recovery. With weak export performance and low domestic demand, the current account deficit
closed in 2011-2012 and external debt ratios declined to 102 percent of GDP at end-2012.
However, the European deleveraging meant that in 2012 alone, foreign owners of local banks
reduced their exposure by 4.8 percent of GDP, thus reducing their share to 16 percent of
Croatia's total bank financing by end-2012. In addition to a lack of domestic financing available
for recovery, foreign direct investment (FDI) has not returned to pre-crises levels.

3

Figure 1: Recent Economic Developments (2008-2012)
... creating pressures for financial sector stability.

Croatia's recovery is more delayed than expected...

% Of hIPL

12

6%

-12

... and high external indebtedness.

Continued weak public finances cause rising public debt...
CI

-1)

PuOROb,

a

-

EvMma kz,

0

% ofGflP

GP{h)--

10.
331A

210

2004209

201

20081

Aq-1

10C9

J1OID

11111ITWONTh1

-440
70

11 -4-

PubIIcdek,.%CDP (IhSJ

119I b~alancf--A(5DP(rhs)

52

IL

Note: General government deficit data are estimates and are under revision in light of the full change-over to ESA methodology. Harmonized
data expected in October 2013. Public debt includes government guarantees.
Source: CNB, Croatian Bureau of Statistics (CROSTAT), staff calculations

14.
The Croatian National Bank (CNB) maintained an accommodating monetary policy
stance in the context of subdued economic activity, while maintaining exchange rate and
price stability. Monetary policy continued to operate a tightly managed Kuna/Euro exchange
rate with little variability. Given the high degree of Euroization of the economy, exchange rate
policy options remain limited. In spite of a slight Kuna depreciation against the Euro, monetary
policy was able to maintain an accommodating stance in persisting recessionary conditions
which help to ensure financial system stability through the active use of reserve requirement and
foreign exchange interventions.
15.
To encourage lending to the private sector, the CNB decreased significantly its
regulatory costs since 2009. The last intervention was in April 2012 when the reserve
requirement rate was cut from 15 percent to 13.5 percent, injecting HRK4 billion into the system.
CNB helped keep the Kuna/Euro exchange rate on average at HRK7.52 throughout 2012 - a
depreciation of 1.1 percent from 2011. Gross international reserves increased slightly to C11.2
billion in 2012, equivalent to around 7.2 months of imports. The level of both gross and net
usable reserves continued to be much higher than money (MI).

4

Table 1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators (2009-2015)
Projections
Indicators
National Accounts
Real GDP growth
Total Investment
Gross National Savings
Foreign Savings
Public Sector
Revenues
Expenditures
Interest payments
Fiscal Balance
Primary Balance
Balance of Payments
Trade Balance
Current Account Balance
FDI
Debt
Gross External Debt
Public Debt (incl. govt guarantees)
Gross Internat. Res. (months of
imports of G&NFS)
Memo items:
GDP (EUR millions)
GDP (US$ millions)
Inflation (p.a, 0%)
Debt service to export ratio
Exchange rate HRK:US$ (p.a.)

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

-6.9%
24.9
20.5
5.1

-2.3%
20.9
20.1
1.1

0.0%
20.4
19.3
0.9

-2.0%
19.4
19.3
-0.1

-0.4%
19.4
20.4
-0.9

1.5%
20.2
20.6
-0.4

2.3%
20.6
20.8
-0.2

39.2
43.2
2.0
-4.0
-3.1

38.4
44.2
2.2
-5.8
-3.9

37.5
44.1
2.6
-6.6
-4.3

38.2
42.0
3.0
-3.8
-0.8

38.4
42.0
3.3
-3.6
-0.4

37.9
41.3
3.4
-3.4
0.1

37.7
40.8
3.3
-3.1
0.2

-16.1
-5.1
3.4

-12.9
-1.1
1.0

-13.8
-0.9
2.4

-13.7
0.1
2.4

-13.5
0.9
1.5

-13.5
0.4
1.8

-13.4
0.2
2.2

101.0
51.3

104.6
60.9

103.0
65.4

102.3
70.0

100.4
70.5

99.0
69.1

96.4
67.5

7.0

7.2

7.2

7.2

7.1

7.1

7.0

44,781
62,244
2.4
54.4
5.28

44,441
58,874
1.1
54.3
5.50

44,412
61,789
2.3
50.0
5.34

43,929
56,442
3.4
46.2
5.85

44,562
58,479
3.0
48.3
5.75

46,021
60,393
2.1
49.9
5.75

48,011
63,004
2.0
50.1
5.75

Note: General government deficit data are estimates and are under revision in light of the full change-over to ESA methodology. Harmonized
data expected in October 2013. Public debt includes government guarantees.
Source: Ministry of Finance (MoF), CNB, CROSTAT, World Bank staff calculations.

Risks to the banking sector are increasing as a result of the protracted recession.
16.
NPLs stood at 14 percent of the total loans at the end of 2012, with corporate NPLs at 25 percent
largely from the construction and real estate sectors. Although loan loss provisions are about 42
percent, the banking system remains well capitalized with capital adequacy rates at around 21
percent in 2012 - almost double the minimum requirement. The banking sector's net profit
decreased 27 percent mostly due to the increase in NPLs and the consequent loss provisioning.
Profitability of the banking sector will likely remain in check as CNB implements new regulation
imposing stricter rules on asset classification and higher provisioning in 2013.
Over the short term, the outlook for Croatia's economy is weak, given the slow
17.
growth in Croatia's trading partners and the bank credit contractions. The 2012 GDP
decline of 2 percent is lowering confidence at home while the difficult external environment,
limited FDI inflows and slow progress in structural reforms, means that growth is unlikely to
rebound rapidly without a comprehensive policy response. Such a response will need to include

5

fiscal consolidation to restore debt sustainability and retain market access as well as an
accelerated implementation of the structural reform agenda to improve Croatia's
competitiveness. Maintaining a delicate balance between financial stability to restore public
sector balance and recovery of credit growth to restore private sector growth will be a challenge.
18.

Figure 2: Coverage (provisions as % share of NPLs)

The

slow

recovery

may

result in an increase in poverty.

Based on a poverty line that is fixed
60

in real terms at the 2008 threshold,

..

the poverty headcount rate increased
AZ45

__

by 1.3 percentage points - from 13.3
to 14.6 percent - between 2008 and
2010. The immediate impact of the
crisis was to increase poverty among
rural, farm and households headed

by women and unemployed, retired

o

or

inactive

2008

and

individuals.

2010,

Between

poverty

rates

increased for both male and female

Source: CNB, World Bank calculations

headed households. The adverse
impact of the recession was mainly felt by better off households who, unlike households in the
bottom decile, experienced a decline in consumption. This resulted in a decline in inequality with
the Gini coefficient moving from 23 to 22. Looking ahead, simulations indicate that the increase
in the poverty rate has accelerated, reaching an estimated 17 percent in 2012, accompanied by an
increase in inequality.
Table 2: Trends in Poverty and Inequality, 2008-2012

Poverty headcount rate (%)
Poverty gap (%)
Squared poverty gap (%)
Gender of the household head
Male (%)
Female (%)
Gini coefficient

2008

2009

2010

2011
simulation

2012
simulation

Poverty
13.3
2.9
1.1

14.0
3.2
1.2

14.6
2.8
0.9

15.3
3.0
1.0

16.9
3.6
1.3

12.4
19.0

14.4
14.9

14.9
16.3

16.8
17.5

23.0

22.1

22.6

22.9

12.9
14.3
Inequality
23.9

Notes: Poverty is measured using the absolute (or anchored) poverty line fixed at 60% of median equivalent consumption in 2008. Estimates
and projections are based on the 2008-2010 household budget survey (HBS) by using post-stratification weights for individuals constructed to
match age and sex structure of the population. Projected growth rates of consumption and income in 2011 and 2012 are based on projections
of the household income (depending on labor market flows, changes in social safety nets, developments in subsistence farming, small
businesses and capital markets, and changes in income taxation). Income changes are then transposed to the corresponding change in
consumption.
Source: Staff estimates based on the 2008-2010 HBS.

6

II.C.

Development Challenges and Opportunities

II.C.1. Fiscal Consolidation, Reformed Social Welfare, and Improved Competitiveness
19.
The central challenge facing the Croatian authorities is fiscal consolidation. The
authorities seek a reduction of primary deficit by 0.3 percent on average per year until
primary balance is reached in 2016. The focus is on fiscal sustainability, balanced with the
need to support growth in a recessionary environment. The growth support would mostly come
from the EU grant-funded investment projects which would then ensure long-term fiscal
sustainability. Additional fiscal space in the order of 1 percent of GDP per year is needed as
counterpart funds for the full absorption of EU structural funds. In 2013, Croatia will have access
to a cash-flow facility to ensure its net beneficiary status upon accession; that is, upon accession,
Croatia will pay into the EU budget approximately 0.5 percent of GDP, while the available EU
funds in 2013 will be 1.2 percent of GDP.
20.
Croatia spends more on health and social protection than other countries in Europe
with a high share of benefits and entitlements distributed according to the person's
attributes (rather than their income level) as compared to the much lower share of povertyfocused programs. Rebalancing this mix of social spending would contribute to fiscal
consolidation and a strong more flexible social safety net, while the inclusion of activation
measures would encourage higher labor force participation. Social services are costly, but fall
short of what Croatians desire, while costly social insurance programs reduce labor
competitiveness. Finally, as demographics point to an aging Croatia, the pension and health
systems require bold and innovative reforms to safeguard the well-being of the population.
21.
As the needed 2012 fiscal adjustment was primarily revenue based, the next phase of
fiscal consolidation will focus on expenditures, namely on the areas of entitlements, state
owned enterprises (SOE) and health expenditures. Such second generation fiscal adjustment
can only be achieved through microeconomic reforms at the sector level covering (i) the social
welfare system including planned pension reform and better targeted social benefits; (ii) health
expenditures including the rationalization of hospital networks and (iii) state utilities such as
railways and water.
22.
At the same time, fiscal consolidation needs to be accompanied by public policies to
promote the private sector in support of future growth. Recovery cannot be achieved without
private sector confidence and investment, both of which have been affected by the crisis. Croatia
has been receiving low rankings for market efficiency and remains at the bottom of EU countries
in terms of labor force participation and governance effectiveness. As Croatia remains less
competitive than most European and many other comparator countries, growth will not return
easily without initiatives from the public sector to spur competitiveness. Croatia's advantage as a
science and technology center, as a gateway to Europe and as a trade and logistics hub as well as
other potential sources of growth will be realized through Government efforts to encourage
entrepreneurship and investment in knowledge-based higher technologies throughout the
country. To accomplish this, strong policy measures in support of private sector innovation need
to be developed and strengthened.

7

23.
Creating space for the private sector requires finding ways to reduce the large
public sector footprint, while improving role of the state as a service provider. Modernized
public enterprises with improved governance and performance along with a reduction of the
logistics costs in infrastructure (e.g. railways, energy, and information technology) is needed to
accomplish Croatia's two edged goal of fiscal responsibility and public sector service delivery.
Public enterprises continue to play an excessively large role in the Croatian economy, but suffer
from poor performance, financial losses that are covered by the state, and weak and overly
politicized Boards as managers. State subsidies to public enterprises amounted to HRK 9 billion,
or 2.7 percent of GDP, compared to an EU average of 0.8 percent of non-crisis aid. The role of
public enterprises is critical to the overall competitiveness of the economy as public enterprises
provide inputs (water, energy) for the private sector and facilitate trade and logistics support
(transport - rails, ports, roads) for the economy as a whole.
II.C.2. Governance, Climate Change and Gender
24.
Croatia has made concerted efforts to improve governance and fight corruption.
Judicial reform and anti-corruption programs have resulted in increased prosecution of
corruption cases, although challenges remain. Croatia's new Strategy for the Development of the
Judiciary for the period 2013-2018 proposes legislation and organizational changes, such as
court network rationalization, automated case management, intemet availability of decisions,
shifting simple cases to clerks for decisions and uncontested claims to notaries for enforcement;
and strengthening court procedures. In addition, concerted efforts are being made by the Ministry
of Justice and the State Geodetic Administration to develop a joint cadaster and land registration
system.
25.
Croatia will have to make efforts to comply with the EU environmental and climate
change/energy acquis. Global climate change has already left its mark as Croatia's precipitation
decreases and temperatures rise. Although the Government has taken action in accordance with
the Kyoto protocol, the effects of the global climate change cannot be avoided. Most affected
sectors will be agriculture, fisheries, hydropower, and tourism, which account for 25 percent of
the Croatian economy, employ 35 percent of the labor force, and represent total annual GDP of
E9 billion. GHG emissions today are smaller compared to the base year, 1990. Croatia's GHG
are now less than 0.1 percent of global emissions, giving it one of the lowest per capita emissions
records in Europe among Kyoto Protocol Annex I countries. GHG emissions recorded an 11
percent increase between 1995 and 2007, but the economic crisis produced a significant drop to
10 percent of the 2007 level in 2009 based on good power generation and lower industrial
activities in cement and lime.
26.
Available gender diagnostics point to notable gaps in labor market outcomes.1
Gender diagnostics find that as Croatia prepares to join the European Union, the progress in
reducing gender gaps has been good both in terms of institutions and legislative frameworks as
well as in outcomes in the areas of health, education, and access to finance. However, gender
gaps in the labor market persist along with underrepresentation of women in certain areas of
I Recent diagnostics are available in HazI and others (2011), Croatian Bureau of Statistics (2012), a publication by
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration analyzing Croatia's progress on the Millennium Development
Goals, the European Commission (Progress reports for 2011 and 2012), and World Bank (2013).

8

public life. The European Commission (2011 and 2012) notes good progress in institutions and
laws supporting gender equality. For example, the Ombudsperson for Gender Equality
strengthened its capacity and continued to implement the Gender Equality Act. The National
Policy for Gender Equality 2011-2015 is under implementation. In terms of human development
outcomes, maternal mortality rates and adolescent fertility rate are comparable to the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries as is the six year
gap in life expectancy favoring women (80 years for women and 73.9 for men). Gender gap in
school enrollments is minimal. Yet learning outcomes for both boys and girls lag behind their
peers in the EU. Subject specialization at the tertiary level may be contributing to the
occupational segregation seen in the labor market that leads to less favorable outcomes for
women.
27.
Before the recession, 70 percent of men and 56 percent of women of working age
participated in the labor market. Although equality of pay is required by the EU acquis and
regulated through the Labor Act, there is a gender gap in monthly earnings of about 10 percent of
male earnings. The average gender pay gap is larger in certain sectors. For example, in wholesale
and retail trade, where 53 percent of employees are female, women earn only 80 percent of male
earnings. As expected, women predominate in health and social sector (79.2 percent), education
(76.6 percent), and financial and insurance work (69.6 percent). In contrast, more than 75 percent
of employees in sectors such as mining, transportation, and construction are male.
28.
The recession has had a larger impact on men's than women's labor market
outcomes. By 2011, labor force participation rates declined to 67 percent for men and 54 percent
for women. In addition, the recession led to an increase in unemployment rates for both women
and men. In 2008, the unemployment rate was 10 percent for women and 7 percent for men.
However, by 2011, unemployment rates increased to 14 percent for both women and men,
thereby eliminating the gender difference in unemployment rate. For men, the drop in labor force
participation rate and the doubling of unemployment rate between 2008 and 2011 reflects the
impact of the recession on sectors dominated by men such as construction and manufacturing.
29.
Gender focus will feature prominently in the implementation of the CPS. The WBG
lending instruments in the CPS will feature gender-informed projects that include gender
diagnostics and increasingly gender-based actions. For example, the Bank's Export Finance
Intermediation Loan (EFIL), the Science and Technology 2 (STP2) project, the Partial Credit
Guarantee Project (PCGP) all include gender monitoring indicators. In addition, the Poverty and
Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) conducted for Economic Recovery Development Policy Loan 2
(ERDPL2) will include attention to gender. All future Bank reimbursable advisory services
(RAS) activities will also be gender-informed as well as in IFC investments.
Figure 3: Activity rates by gender

Figure 4: Unemployment rates by gender

75.0

20

700
65. 04
6

10

60.0
55.0 -5
50.0

0

45.0

2003

2004

2005

2006

- -Men

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

W mnMen

2002

2003

2004 2005 2006

2007 2008
-

-

2009 2010 2011

2012

oe

Source: World Bank staff calculation using data accessed through EUROSTAT.

9

III.

World Bank Group Engagement Strategy

III.A. Government Program and Medium Term Strategy
30.
The Government's 2013 Economic Program, approved on April 18, 2013 confronts
the country's main development challenges with a commitment to Europe 2020 "smart,
sustainable and inclusive" growth strategy. Partly due to the heavy emphasis on social
spending, Croatia is well on track to meet its Millennium Development Goals (MDG) 2, as well
as fulfilling its Europe 2020 Targets. According to the recent review by the Commission
Croatia's most pressing development challenges include: (i) low labor market participation, (ii)
under-developed knowledge-based factors of growth, (iii) environmental protection and climate
change, (iv) education system, and (v) public governance at the central and local levels. 3
Accordingly, the 2013 Economic Program, which like any member country will be reviewed by
the EU for conformation with the Europe 2020 strategy, contains reference to progress on the
five targets being monitored by the Europe 2020: (i) employment, (ii) R&D investment, (iii)
climate change and energy, (iv) education, and (v) poverty and social inclusions.
Table 3: 2013 Economic Program of Croatia - Targets
Main goal

Croatia (2011)

Croatia (2020)

Europe 2020

57%

59%

75%

0.75%

1.4%

3%

3a. Reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions (compared to 1990)
3b. Ratio of renewable energy in overall
energy consumption
3c. Energy efficiency
4. Education

95.2%

106%

80%

13.8%

20%

20%

20% (9192 TOE)

20% (1474000 TOE)

4a. Ratio of early school leavers
4b. Ratio of population between 30-34
with completed tertiary education
5. Poverty/ social exclusion
(number of poor)

4.1%

4%

10%

24.5%

35%

40%

1382000

1282000

Reduction of 20 million

1.

Employment (employment rate)

2.

R&D (% of GDP invested in R&D)

3.

Climate change/energy

31.
The 2013 Economic Program recognizes that achieving these targets requires
restarting economic growth after a half-decade of decline. It therefore goes further to identify
ten elements of its National Growth Strategy - five priorities from its yearly growth review and
five supplemental areas which recognize that implementation of microeconomic reform at the
sector level is fundamental to fiscal consolidation and strengthening competitiveness for private
sector driven growth. These reforms will be complemented by Government's commitment to
strengthen the effectiveness, efficiency and transparency of Government, including the
Croatia has met and largely exceeds the Global MDG with regards to Poverty, Education, Gender, Health, ICT and
Environment indicators,
March 2013 Position Paper of the Commission Services on the Development of Partnership Agreement and
Programs in the Republic of Croatia for the period 2014-2020
2

10

acceleration of reform in public sector enterprises, greater emphasis on environmental and
energy sector investments and even reorganization and rationalization of the civil service.
Accordingly, the 2013 Economic Program of Croatia identifies an, integrated program based on
policy objectives. The degree to which these policies objectives translate into economic recovery
will be determined by the strength, speed and harmony of implementation - across economic
sectors, government functions and among Croatia's disparate stakeholders. Given the mixed
track record of reform implementation in recent years, success will require intensive and
sustained attention from top policy makers, middle level technicians, local leaders, as well as
managers of private sector industry and social union leaders in order to all work in a harmonious
and mutually reinforcing manner.
32.
Croatia is voluntarily participating in the European Semester, a process of ex-ante
economic policy coordination among member states. Its purpose is to enhance sustainability of
public finances. Croatia delivered its April 2013 Economic Program, consisting of elements of
the Convergence Program and the National Reform Program, as well as key strategic documents
required of Member States in the context of EU economic governance.
Box 1: 2013 Economic Program of Croatia
*

Fiscalconsolidation with particular focus on pension reform and rationalizing hospitals.

*

Improved functioning of domestic credit markets with focus on State Banks, development

funds and bankruptcy act.
*

Promoting growth and competitiveness though the "smart specialization strategy" and

*

other sector related programs.
Reducing unemployment and social consequences of the crisis through improved
functioning of labor markets and better job related education.

*

Deinstutionalizationof social protection and improving social benefits system through

means testing for better targeting the most vulnerable.
*

Modernization of public administration through improved systems and rationalization in

judiciary regulation, state agencies, bureaus, funds, centers and other legal entities with
public authority.
*

Privatization and restructuringof SOEs including shipyard restructuring, railway sector

liberalization and reorganization of water sector
*

Reform of State Subsidies through an improved and efficient system of state subsidies

monitoring, for improved use and outcomes.
*

Infrastructure development measures including for railways, port and shipping, inland

waterways, broadband internet, rural areas and sustainable water management.
*

Improving agriculture competitiveness and rural development through agglomeration of

agriculture land and organizing markets for agricultural products.
*

Nature and environment protection through improving the state of sea environment and

coastal areas and EU Natura 2000.

11

III.B. Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy
III.B.1.

Lessons from CPS Completion Report and Stakeholder Consultations

33.
A flexible design structure enables timely adjustments to evolving country needs
and mitigates risks of pursuing unachievable CPS objectives. The flexible design allowed
program modifications during the outbreak of the crisis and was an important element in the
moderately satisfactory performance of the previous CPS. Acknowledging that fiscal
consolidation is likely to take several years, the Bank was able to shift to a programmatic support
through for the Economic Recovery Development Policy Loan (ERDPL), which successfully
supported the Government's economic recovery program. Going forward, the CPS Progress
Report should take stock of implementation to allow for mid-term adjustment in the strategy, as
needed, to ensure alignment with country development objectives. This should entail regular
monitoring and evaluation to ensure that the CPS objectives remain relevant to country goals.
For example, the existing annual Joint Portfolio Review, led by the Ministry of Finance, which
gathers project stakeholders from line ministries and administrative bodies together with Bank
teams could serve to monitor regularly progress in achieving the CPS objectives.
34.
A strengthened focus on client absorption capacity and a better selectivity of
engagement areas will drive the new partnership with Croatia. Fulfilling the requirements of
the intensive EU negotiations process was difficult, absorbing the public administration
resources. Capacity in the public administration to implement projects remains vulnerable, as
reflected in moderately satisfactory portfolio performance during the CPS period. With Croatia's
upcoming opportunity to use large amounts of grant funds, Bank support to help prepare and
manage projects could be considered. As initiated under the CPS mid-term review, more
emphasis will be on maximizing readiness for absorbing the EU Funds, with traditional financing
likely to be considered for addressing the country priorities that cannot be funded by EU
institutions.
35.
Portfolio performance has been uneven during the last CPS period and can be
improved through greater monitoring and a focus on CPS results. At its peak in 2009,
Croatia's portfolio was the sixth largest in the Europe and Central Asia Region (ECA), with
commitments of over $1.2 billion for 19 projects. The Croatian portfolio has since scaled back to
10 projects in FY13. With the current schedule of project closings, the portfolio will consist of
only two or three projects by end-2016. Several projects experienced implementation delays due
to poor preparation and problems with information systems that use ICT solutions (such as, tax,
land registry, and judicial case management systems).4 The application of a stricter
implementation readiness criteria and the use of project preparation advance have proven useful
in mitigating risks for implementation delays. An in-depth portfolio review carried out in 2009
by the Government and the Bank adopted a set of corrective measures that mitigated
implementation constraints. The Government and the Bank have also conducted annual Joint
Portfolio Reviews (JPR) since 2006, as required by legislation. During the new CPS period, the
JPRs will include annual monitoring of CPS objectives.
Complexity of such systems is often underestimated both by the borrower and the Bank teams which resulted in
problems with contract implementation, delays, increased costs and functional shortcomings. To prevent this,
assessing the users' capacity to absorb, maintain and manage the systems, as well as design and procurement should
be shifted in the preparation stage or latest in the first year of project implementation.
4

12

36.
This CPS is the product of dialogue between the WBG Team and the Croatian
authorities as well as with a series of stakeholder consultations. These consultations took
place over the course of 2012, mostly in Zagreb and Brussels, with the European Commission,
the Delegation of the European Commission in Zagreb; members of parliament; the private
sector; think-tanks, academia; diplomatic community; international organizations (United
Nations agencies, etc.), European international financial institutions (European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, European Investment Bank, etc.), civil society and the media.
The main challenges discussed were how to improve the competitiveness of the economy, with
emphasis on job creation and improvement of the business and investment climate, and public
sector reforms to improve efficiency and accountability. In addition, the role of the WBG in
helping the authorities raise the capacity for absorption of forthcoming EU structural funds was

highlighted.
37.
Overall, the feedback from all stakeholders was encouraging and provided both a
realistic vision of the efficacy of the WBG's work in Croatia to date, and provided valuable
input on future directions the partnership should take during the FY14-17 CPS period. The
stakeholders emphasized the important role of the WBG in Croatia as a knowledge provider, a
source of international best practices, and an advocate for change. In discussions with senior
Government officials, the Deputy Prime Ministers, Line Ministers and Agency Heads, the
authorities expressed three categories of desired WBG involvement: (i) the WBG as a strategic
partner in supporting structural reforms; (ii) the WBG as a source of technical assistance
especially on regional and local levels to help in EU Funds absorption and institutional capacity
building; and (iii) the WBG as a source of last resort by doing what others do not.
38.
To inform the CPS on the broad range of opinions on the WBG work in Croatia, the
Bank undertook a Strategic Survey in October 2011 and a Client Survey in May 2012.
Respondents were asked to rank several sectors and subsectors of the economy based on their
perceived country needs for the next CPS period and their evaluation of the WBG's operations in
the previous CPS period. Key development themes for the new CPS were identified, including
implementation of reforms to achieve and sustain economic growth, focusing on job creation,
removing barriers to doing business, competitiveness of the private sector, reform of the public
sector, education system, labor market and accelerating convergence with the EU15 by
increasing Croatia's institutional capacity for EU Fund absorption. These themes are consistent
with the priorities identified in this CPS. Less positively, the respondents noted the slowness and
complexity of WBG processes and identified interaction with stakeholders outside government
as an area for improvement.
III.B.2.

Overview of World Bank Group Partnership Strategy

39.
The previous Country Partnership Strategy for FY09-FY12 was discussed by the
World Bank's Board of Directors on September 30, 2008 and extended to FY13 to allow the
new FY14-17 CPS to coincide with Croatia's EU membership. The 2011 Progress Report
adjusted the engagement to include in the WBG partnership strategy, alignment to the EU when
the European Council gave the green light for Croatia to become a new member state. This CPS
was prepared collaboratively with a new coalition Government, which began its mandate
following parliamentary elections in December 2011 at a time of global financial and economic
crises. The 2013 Economic Program of Croatia will address the many challenge facing Croatia,

13

and the CPS engagement is aligned to support selected engagements, especially in sectors that
show a strong commitment to change and reforms and a drive for results.
40.
The proposed CPS coincides with the start of Croatia's membership in the
European Union and the unique opportunity to make good use of large amounts of EU
grants to develop the country's economic potential as a gateway to Europe, as a transit
point for exchange, and as a knowledge-based economy. There are two types of risks
identified: external and domestic. Challenges remain in Croatia's ability to achieve fiscal
sustainability and foster private sector competitiveness - both needed to compete within the EU
from a position of economic strength rather than weakness.
41.
The Government and the Bank agreed to continue their partnership covered by the
FY14-17 CPS. Despite its high income, institutional capacity to implement reforms and absorb
EU Funds remains uneven, and the Croatian authorities have expressed support for continued
engagement with the WBG. Formal graduation discussions are envisioned beyond the FY14-17.
The Government has expressed a need for continued WBG partnership beyond EU accession,
citing reform-promoting support fostered by DPLs and institutional capacity building from
'learning-by-doing' fostered from investment loans. However, the Government recognizes the
Bank's exposure limits and the need to modify the lending relationship in light of Croatia's entry
into the EU and access to large grant funds.
42.
The CPS envisages a maturing of the Bank's program away from lending while
concurrently envisaging a gradual increase in RAS. With the majority of Bank lending frontloaded at the beginning of the FY14-17 CPS period, the strategy envisages the upfront
development of new instruments including: (i) results-based engagements (for example,
Programs for Results, PforR) linked to and complementing the DPLs to support sector-specific
reforms; and (ii) reimbursable advisory services (RAS), mostly in the form of analytical and
advisory activities (AAA) with a focus on Croatia's current structural and institutional
challenges.
43.
The potential for RAS engagements come from a demand-driven desire to use the
WBG as a knowledge partner providing solutions for the country's economic challenges.
Following established RAS models from other member states, AAA-RAS support will be
maintained in areas of strategic importance to the reform program. For Croatia, these include
higher education, pension, public administration, judicial, and state-owned enterprise reforms
where the Bank has a continuing dialogue and in some cases evolving engagement. As the FY1417 CPS period overlaps with the 2014-2020 programming period, partnership arrangements
between the EC, the Croatian authorities, and the Bank will be explored.
III.B.3.

Engagement Areas, supported by Lending and Non-Lending Activities

44.
During the next four years, the WBG's CPS centers on assisting Croatia achieve its
objective of initiating EU membership from a position of strong economic fundamentals.
To achieve the objective, Croatia's policy makers recognize the inter-dependence of the key
reform areas. In particular, the WBG engagement during the FY14-17 period will be driven by
Croatia's specific challenges reflecting the need for a comprehensive and mutually dependent set
of reforms, programs and activities, as encompassed in three separate but inter-related pillars,
with each pillar having three distinct themes that are linked to nine attributable results indicators.

14

*

The first pillar focuses on Public Finance, based on the need for continued fiscal
consolidation to underpin renewed and sustained growth, along with an emphasis on
expenditure rationalization to ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term. Under
the Public Finance Pillar, the three themes examined are: Revenue Consolidation,
Efficiency of Social Protection, and Rationalized Health Spending.

*

The second pillar seeks an improvement in Competitiveness required to spur growth,
centering on the required structural, institutional and governance reforms, as Croatia lags
its EU peers in a range of competitiveness related indicators. Under the Competitiveness
Pillar, the three themes examined are: Strengthening Public Enterprises, Improved
Judicial and Regulatory Market Oversight, and Promoting a Private Sector-led Transition
to a Knowledge Economy.

*

The third pillar seeks to maximize the benefits of EU Membership in order to implement
harmonized policies, improve the country's capacity to absorb a substantial increase in
EU Funds and help use these resources effectively to turn the economy around toward
EU convergence. Under the EU Membership Pillar, the three themes examined are:
Supporting the Convergence Process, Preparing National Reform Programs for Use of
EU Funds, and Strengthening the Capacity of Public Sector for EU Funds Absorption.
Improving Croatia's Regional Cooperation will be additionally examined under the third
pillar.

Pillar I: Public Finance
45.
The greater fiscal adjustment is needed, even though Croatia has made efforts in the
area of fiscal consolidation during the past years to strengthen the macroeconomic
underpinning for growth and prosperity. Emphasis on revenue enhancements and social
expenditure rationalization to ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term is central to this
debate. Under this pillar, the WBG engagement will focus on overall economic policy dialogue
through the DPL series, supplemented by AAA-RAS support for revenue-generating tax reforms,
and complementary results-based engagement in the social protection and health sectors for
expenditure-rationalizing reforms.
46.
To address the immediate economic challenges, the Bank foresees continued and
increased levels of policy-based lending to continue supporting the Government's reform
agenda, especially in the first half of FY14-17. Policy-based lending, in particular DPLs,
provides the basis for the Bank's policy engagement in Croatia and serves to convene multiple
stakeholders to discuss reforms at a comprehensive level. Therefore DPLs will likely account for
a large proportion of Bank lending during the FY14-17 period. The policy-based lending
instruments are rooted in on-going AAA in the area of Public Finance Review, Labor and
Pension Policy Notes, Hospital Rationalization Note, Railways Policy Note, and Technical
Assistance (TA) for Means-testing amongst other existing AAA.
47.
The Bank will deploy new results-based instruments, complementing DPLs, to
support sector-specific reforms during the CPS period. The Bank is partnering with key
stakeholders to improve the social assistance system - both through parametric changes, as well
as improvements to the administration of the system. The Bank is also engaged in the health
sector to help introduce cost rationalization measures that allows Croatia to sustain its good

15

health outcomes but at a lower cost. In addition, the Bank is working with the Croatian Tax
Administration (CTA) to support revenue enhancing measures such as improved tax compliance.
In all three areas, (i) reforms to improve the social assistance system through improved targeting
of social assistance programs; (ii) reforms to the health system from hospital rationalization and
health expenditures reductions; and (iii) revenue enhancement and efficiency by modernizing the
tax revenue system, the Bank will explore the potential for results-based engagements (e.g.
PforRs).
48.
The Bank is working with the Croatian National Bank (CNB), supported in part by
the newly established Vienna-based FinSAC Center, on crisis simulation exercises, to deal with
challenges stemming from the ongoing Eurozone crisis. The Bank's Treasury team will explore
with the Ministry of Finance, hedging operations, partial credit guarantees operations for subsovereign (public enterprises and municipalities), and debt management advisory services.
Revenue Consolidation
49.
Croatia's tax compliance and collection efficiency has made strides in recent
months, but further improvements are ongoing to modernize its tax administration.
Information and Communication Technology tools for compliance, risk management, and audit
are being updated to strengthen strategic planning and implement institutional reforms. Central
to the Bank's engagement is the restructuring of the Large Taxpayer Office to separate and
administer taxpayers according to size, market segments and risks.
50.
The results of the Bank's engagement to support revenue enhancing measures will
be measured by tax compliance/tax gaps. Through Bank lending instruments, like the
ERDPL2 and the Revenue Administration Modernization Project, the Bank will continue to
support the modernization of the CTA.
Efficiency of Social Protection
51.
Croatia has an extensive, but costly and fragmented social assistance system, with a
large number of categorical entitlements. At three percent of GDP, spending on social
assistance programs is higher than that of other Central and Eastern European (CEE) countries,
with a large share of spending going to war veterans and families. The Government is aiming to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its social assistance through improved targeting and
administrative rationalization of social welfare system. Measures such as data exchange between
the social protection information system and other public databases and an improved Social
Inspectorate will help enable some savings. However, the largest fiscal gains would be generated
through introduction of means testing for increased number of social benefits, including for
veterans and families.
52.
The Bank is working with the Ministry of Social Policy and Youth on a Social
Protection results-based project and through the ERDPL2, which would support
implementation of the Government's reforms to improve the social assistance system through:
consolidation of benefits to reduce fragmentation, broader application of a means-test to improve
targeting of social assistance programs, the inclusion of activation measures to bolster the labor
force, and the introduction of tools to tackle error and fraud in order to generate savings.

16

53.
Means-tested programs as a share of all social assistance programs will be used as
the results indicator to measure the Bank's social protection engagement. The challenge of
improving the targeting and efficiency of social assistance programs will be supported by Bank
interventions that seek to contribute to the Government's goal to ensure sustainability of social
sector spending.
Rationalized Public Health Spending
54.
Croatia is achieving good health results but at a substantial cost. Health care is
almost entirely publicly funded (nearly 85 percent), and health insurance contributions have been
the main source of financing (91 percent). At 7.8 percent of GDP, Croatia's health spending is
near the top for new EU member states. The Government seeks improvements in health care
financing through cost cutting and redirecting expenditures towards quality and efficiency. Cost
cutting is to be achieved by redirecting some hospital capacity toward day care and away from
extended treatment, while expanding more cost effective capacities for acute and chronic
conditions in hospitals. Efficiency gains are expected from information and communication
systems to centralize and integrate information management.
55.
The Bank will continue to help with the introduction of further cost rationalization
measures in the health sector by monitoring public health spending, health sector arrears
and rationalizing the public hospital network. Instruments involved in supporting these
activities include ERDPL2 and the Development of Emergency Medical Services and Investment
Planning Project are providing the analytical and operational basis to deepen the Bank's
engagement in the sector through a results-based engagement such as the proposed health sector
results-based project.
56.
The two results indicators in the health sector are the total reduction in public
accrual health spending and the reorganization of the hospital system. These indicators will
measure the efficiency of health sector spending, focusing on the unsustainable level of health
spending and the inefficient, high cost long-term care services provided by hospitals.
Pillar II: Competitiveness
57.
The Croatian economy is less competitive than its peers. In the latest Global
Competitiveness Survey, Croatia ranked 81 out of 144, worse than a year ago while most CEE
countries improved in ranking, making Croatia's decline more poignant. More important,
Croatia's private sector share of GDP has remained at 70 percent, a level lower than its EU
peers, during 2007-2011. To achieve private sector-led growth and faster EU convergence,
actions are needed to jump start enterprise restructuring and new business creation and old firm
exit required for the economy to reorient itself away from resource efficiency toward one reliant
on knowledge, innovation and transit related services for its geo-economic edge as Europe's
transport hub. Within this pillar, specific areas for WBG engagement include: (i) strengthening
public administration through efficiency improvements in the governance and management of
public enterprises; (ii) better market governance through improved judicial processes and better
regulatory oversight of private sector activities, and red tape reforms to facilitate doing business;
and (iii) facilitation of private sector activities in the areas of energy efficiency and renewable
energy, FDI, small and medium enterprises (SME), and R&D and innovation support.

17

58.
To enhance Croatia's competitiveness, the Bank will focus on AAA-RAS
engagements with curtailed lending, while the IFC expects to increase its investment
support. Under the competitiveness pillar, the Bank will provide limited lending support and
only in areas where the desire and momentum for reforms are high. Instead, the Bank
engagement will predominantly be AAA-RAS. Much of the AAA-RAS engagements to advance
the country's competitiveness are in the discussions stage, predicated on a demand-driven
platform, in select areas where the Bank has a clear technical and comparative advantage to
deliver. Given deleveraging and lower capital inflows to Croatia, IFC expects to increase its role
in Croatia in support of private enterprise. To improve competitiveness, IFC will seek to provide
long-term financing to export oriented companies, promote foreign investors and transfer of
technologies, invest in infrastructure and help Croatian companies to expand markets and even
invest in the region. MIGA will also consider supporting foreign investors in Croatia through
provision of political risk guarantees.
Strengthening Public Enterprises
59.
Promoting public enterprise restructuring and governance will focus on structural
reforms aimed at the Croatian Railways (HZ) system as one of the key strategic sectors for
the country as well as some of its largest loss making public enterprises (HZ Infrastructure and
HZ Passenger Transport). Given its vital transit position in Europe, one of the main competitive
advantages and opportunities for Croatian is that its railway network is deeply embedded in
Europe's major transport corridors. Croatia Railways sit at the junction of several pan-European
transport corridors (e.g. the East-West Pan-European Rail corridor X, corridor Vb connecting
Rijeka with Zagreb and the Hungarian border, and corridor Vc connecting Ploce and running
South-North across Bosnia and Herzegovina). But the system faces severe operational and
financial challenges. Reduced rail traffic and limited operational performance by passenger and
cargo operations have raised operating costs and undermined the financial sustainability of HZ,
which depends on large amounts of state support. In 2012, it received HRK 2 billion in subsidies
while outdated infrastructure and rolling stock require large capital investments for renewal.
60.
The Bank's work on the railways sector will seek to contribute to a dialogue on how
to improve governance and management of other loss making public enterprises in the
future. The goal of turning around key strategic public enterprises is aimed at both reducing
budgetary subsidies to ailing public enterprises and improving Croatian public enterprise
competitiveness as it enters a highly competitive EU market. The Bank is currently working with
the various companies created from Croatian Railways and Croatian Electricity Corporation,
engaged in discussions with Government on sector restructuring options, and may also engage
other strategic public enterprises that have longstanding cooperation with the WBG such as the
Ports Authorities in Rijeka and Ploce and Croatian Waters and local water utilities.
61.
The instruments for the Bank's engagement will be predominantly AAA-RAS
support. Through two economic and sector work (ESW), the Railways Sector Policy Note and
the Energy Sector Review, the Bank is engaged in policy dialogue. These ESW will help gauge
the desire for reforms and the consequent depth of future Bank engagement. Future lending
engagement, especially in the Railways to support the country's transport and logistics links,
could be developed if other financing sources are not available.

18

62.
The results indicator for this engagement entails a broad measure to monitor the
development of public enterprise restructuring strategies. The engagement aims to contribute
to the development of coherent strategic directions and priorities for key strategic public
enterprise in particular in the railway and energy sectors. As the magnitude and depth of the
Bank's public enterprise engagement remain uncertain, sector strategies prepared and adopted by
the Government will be used as a proxy measure.
Improved Judiciary and Regulatory Market Oversight
63.
Public administration in Croatia is large, expensive, and relatively low in
effectiveness. Its excessive size slows decision making and service delivery. Often cited highly
in the list of barriers to doing business in Croatia, public administration in Croatia is hampered
by many of the organizational rigidities, functional overlaps, and remuneration concerns which
exist in many countries and discourages the emergence of a professional managerial staff.
64.
Removing barriers to doing business in Croatia will require improving the delivery
of public services, expediting judicial processes and eliminating needless red tape. One area
where significant progress has been made is justice reforms, due in part to the EU accession
process. Partly due to the high demand for adjudicative services, Croatia supports one of the
largest court networks in Europe with 43 judges per 100,000 inhabitants, compared to the EUIO
average of 26.4. This results in judicial expenditures of 0.7 percent of GDP, more than double
the EUIO average of 0.3 percent. In addition, performance challenges remain including those
covering (i) resource management (financial, human, physical, and ICT); (ii) capital investment;
and (iii) transparency of judicial decision making processes. Courts are now disposing of cases
faster, have reduced backlogs, and have begun to automate case management. Cadastre and land
registry data have been digitalized and are available online to citizens and legal entities, which is
vital for the protection of property rights, transparency of the land administration system,
business transactions, and access to credit. But many institutional challenges affecting
government-business interface in Croatia remain.
65.
Both the IFC and the Bank will assist in red tape reforms to facilitate doing business
and promote foreign direct investments. The Bank-administered REPARIS program ("Road to
Europe Program of Accounting Reforms and Institutional Strengthening"), aimed at removing
obstacles and creating a better environment for a private sector growth, will continue into the
CPS period. The Bank is engaged in developing Croatia's smart specialization strategy through
technical assistance support. The Bank's Integrated Land Administration System (ILAS) Project
will continue to support the development of a joint information land registration and cadaster
system, with possible follow-up AAA-RAS in areas such as Land Governance Assessment
Framework, Real Estate Modernization System, and Crowd Sourcing Harmonization of Land
Record. The Justice Sector Support Project (JSSP) and two ESW, the Justice Sector Public
Expenditure Review and the Governance Case Study, have advanced the Bank's engagement
with the Ministry of Justice. Follow-up AAA-RAS such as a Justice Sector Functional Review is
envisaged.
66.
The results indicators under this engagement will monitor the efficiency and
effectiveness of the judicial system, with the aim of facilitating the ease of doing business in
Croatia. The unreasonable lengthy duration of proceedings and the slow and inefficient judicial
process has been a challenge to domestic and foreign investors alike. To create a business-

19

friendly environment, further reductions in the high backlog of court cases are warranted. As
such, the results indicators will monitor the reduction in the backlog of cases in the judiciary and
the reduction in the number of courts in the country.
Promoting a Private Sector-Led Transition to a Knowledge Economy
67.
Croatia seeks a private sector driven transition to a knowledge economy while
providing appropriate public sector support to achieve the country's goals of smart,
sustainable and inclusive development strategy. In the near term, the objective is being
pursued by increasing the renewable share of energy consumption along with an increase in
energy efficiency as called for by the Europe 2020 strategy to which Croatia has targets aligned
with Europe 2020 numerical targets.
68.
Croatia will need to ensure access to reliable and affordable knowledge inputs as
part of the effort to ensure private sector competitiveness in the knowledge economy, by
providing support to SMEs - in particular access to finance for new, smaller firms attempting
to export - in view of the upcoming EU accession and enhanced competitive pressures - and by
facilitating a research agenda which seeks the commercialization of basic and applied R&D.
Cooperation between innovative firms and public research organizations, where 60 percent of
public R&D investments goes, is limited to 24 percent in Croatia, as compared to 38 percent in
Slovenia and 64 percent in Finland. In the private sector, the volume of business R&D is low.
Despite generous tax based subsidies of about 35 percent for R&D, Croatian businesses spend
about 630 per capita compared to Slovenia that spends around 6130 per capita. Overall, Croatia
would benefit from improved governance and performance-based financing in the tertiary
education and science sectors to support its competitiveness goals.
69.
IFC expects to increase its engagement in the country, given deleveraging of
European banks and overall low international capital flows to Croatia, as well as changes
in the Government policies to further open up the economy to the private sector
participation. During the next four years, IFC expects to invest in Croatia up to US$600 million
for its own account. Through its investments IFC will support Croatia's return to sustainable
economic growth. IFC will seek to provide long-term financing to improve competitiveness of
local export oriented companies, to increase SME access to financing, to promote foreign
investors and transfer of know-how and technologies, to support private sector investments in the
infrastructure sectors, and to help Croatian companies to expend their market and invest in the
region.
70.
IFC will also be open to support through post-privatization financing for the
corporate and financial sectors. In the corporate sector IFC will focus its financing in the
agribusiness, manufacturing and retail sectors. In the financial sector, given that the banking
sector is well developed and highly competitive, IFC will limit offering of senior debt to larger
banks for special products, including SME support and sustainable energy investments. In
addition, IFC will support regional trade through trade finance programs. IFC will also seek to
play a more active role in developing capital markets, including local currency products. In the

The Croatian targets includes: (i) 20 percent share of renewable sources in final consumption; (ii) 10 percent share
of biofuel in gasoline and diesel fuel; and (iii) 35 percent of electricity from renewable sources.

20

infrastructure sector, IFC will seek to support private sector participation in the transport sector
(e.g. road concessions, inter-modular transport center, LNG terminal). In coordination with the
Bank and the EC, IFC will look for opportunities to support municipal infrastructure projects
including solid waste management and transport projects, through municipal finance products or
through PPPs, including advisory services and investments. IFC will continue to support Croatia
to improve diversity and security of energy supply by seeking opportunities to finance private
sector investments in renewable energy projects and energy efficiency projects (cleaner
production, residential energy efficiency, and sustainable energy projects). Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) will also be open to support foreign investors in Croatia
through the provision of political risk guarantees.
71.
The Bank will support the private sector through Government channels introducing
new and innovative instruments, such as Partial Credit Guarantees (PCG). With a view to
fostering the supply of long term credit and crowding in private investment, the Bank provides
credit lines through the Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development (HBOR) for onlending by commercial banks to exporters and foreign exchange earning companies. The PCG
for HBOR is innovative in that the Bank guarantees a financial intermediation loan, with a view
to assisting HBOR access international financial markets. Future guarantees, supported by
MIGA, will be explored. The Bank will also be exploring additional engagement instruments,
such as venture capital financing that can help with the commercialization of research by
supporting innovative, start-up companies develop balance sheets for eventual venture capital
and private equity financing. Any new Bank lending engagement under this pillar will be
innovative and path-breaking in line with Croatian's middle-income status.
72.
IFC and the Bank will continue to provide complementary support to the country in
the infrastructure sector. IFC will continue to provide financial intermediation support to
SMEs, renewable energy sector firms, and competitive Croatian firms investing in the region.
IFC is considering structuring a public private partnership (PPP) for the Brijuni National Park, a
project which was initiated by the Bank. On-going Bank ESW in the energy sector should help
pave the way for additional IFC investments, in particular, to support energy efficiency and
renewable energy projects. The Bank's work in the health reforms could lead to increased IFC
support for private activities in the sector. The Bank and IFC may also collaborate in private
sector participation in infrastructure, for example when activities are concessional under the
umbrella of the current Rijeka Gateway II projects.
73.
The results indicators under this pillar measure the level of IFC support to
corporations investing in energy efficiency and renewable energy projects. Through this
engagement, IFC seeks to contribute to the diversity and security of energy supply by financing
energy efficiency and renewable energy projects. IFC will also support competitive local
companies to expand in the region and increase exports.
Pillar III. EUMembership
74.
On July 1, 2013, Croatia will become the 28h European Union member state. Upon
joining the Union, Croatia will confront enormous opportunities as well as major
challenges. Croatia will immediately have improved access to a market of 500 million people,

21

benefitting from the flow of labor and capital as well as gain from new information and
technology transfers. Most of all, the amount of EC Structural and Investment (ESI) funds6
available to Croatia will be well in excess of its annual contributions to the EU budget. But
equally, EU membership brings with it serious challenges for Croatia - of aligning strategies and
reform programs to meet the Europe 2020 targets, and of developing processes, institutions and
policies to absorb and manage the funds allocated to Government. As seen from the experience
of other new member states, many governments have been successful in developing the
necessary documents to secure funds from the European Commission (EC), but weaknesses in
implementation, especially institutional arrangements, public investment planning and
management, procurement and financial management, often limit absorption.
75.
To maximize the benefits from joining the EU, the WBG will support Croatia's
convergence with and alignment to EU strategies, policies and targets; and help in the
absorption of EU Funds. The pillar will also support the country's participating in regional
initiatives, especially those supported through EU initiatives. The Bank will only engage in
lending activities in sectors that complement, not displace, the support provided by European
financial institutions. While lending will be limited, the Bank is expected to grow its AAA-RAS
engagement under arrangements involving the Government, the Commission, and the Bank following the same model used in other new member states. Under the third pillar, in the shortterm, Bank instruments would focus on contributing to the preparation of the National Reform
Programs for effective use of EU Funds, while over the medium-term, the Bank would redirect
its focus toward strengthening the capacity of the public sector for the absorption of EU Funds.
The achievement of these objectives involves building country systems for project management
according to EU standards, raising counterpart funding for large civil works projects, and
mobilizing/organizing various arms of government to adapt and comply with EU standards and
systems.
Supporting the Convergence Process
76.
To accelerate growth and achieve faster EU convergence, the Bank will support the
formulation and implementation of structural reforms. In the absence of reforms, the
country's competitiveness will suffer and further stall an already tepid private sector-led
recovery. The convergence process showcases the inter-related nature of the three pillars: to
achieve fiscal consolidation, structural reforms are required; structural reforms are necessary to
meet many of the Europe 2020 targets; where reforms support both the growth and convergence
process. In addition, the potential windfall from a large infusion of EU funds could help revive
growth in the economy. But while EU Funds are expected to provide a source of investment
boost, the needs for co-financing will put pressures on the national budget when fiscal
consolidation is a priority. To better absorb the EU Funds, the Government will have to prioritize
spending patterns to ensure that EU-funded projects are closely linked to Croatia's strategic
priorities; create the fiscal space to ensure co-financing needs are met; and upgrade
administrative capacity to ensure that projects qualify for financing.

The European Structural and Investment funds comprise: the Cohesion Fund, the European Regional Development
Fund, the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development, the European Social Fund, and the European
Maritime and Fisheries Fund.
6

22

77.
Croatia is still far from achieving its Europe 2020 Headline Targets, and meeting
these targets will require structural reforms. Adhering to European 2020 Targets could help
the country's R&D and innovation agenda, improve labor market flexibility, and establish the
foundations for sustainable growth. In this regard, Croatia is currently at 24 percent relative to a
target of 40 percent of 30-34 year olds with completed tertiary education; Croatia is currently the
lowest in the EU at 57 percent relative to a target of 75 percent for increasing employment rate
amongst 20-64 year olds; Croatia severely lags behind Europe investing just 0.73 percent of
GDP relative to a target of 3 percent of GDP invested in R&D and Innovation; and Croatia is at
15 percent relative to a target of 20 percent of using energy from renewable sources. To fulfill its
obligations to Europe 2020, Croatia's development challenge in its first year of EU membership
highlights the need for continued and comprehensive reforms.
78.
The Bank has focused its current portfolio to better align World Bank projects with
the country's EU agenda and to only support activities that promote structural reforms. In
the previous FYO9-13 CPS, the program was aligned around Croatia's EU accession goals to
help fulfill the country's EU benchmarks and negotiations requirements, and the Bank's policy
lending instruments were designed around the same objectives found in the Pre-Accession
Economic Program. In the current CPS, the Bank's portfolio is realigned to support the
convergence process by supporting the country's structural reforms agenda through policy based
instruments and by helping with EU Funds absorption through AAA/RAS assistance. As such,
no specific results are envisaged under the convergence pillar.
Preparing National Reform Programs for Use of EU Funds
79.
As part of this process of the Europe 2020 Strategy, each member state has to
develop an annual National Reform Program (NRP) which addresses European flagship
initiatives. A major challenge Croatia will face with accession is the preparation of all the
documents and institutions for the new 2014-2020 programming period. Through programming,
the principles, the strategy, and the management process are laid down for a specific geographic
area with specific thematic focus. Croatia will have to get EC approval for its programming
documents, as the EC is responsible for the programming process and ensuring the compliance
of key documents with regulations. The Bank has been working with the Ministry of Regional
Development and EU Funds (MRDEUF) through the EU Preparedness TA as well as sector
investment projects to review sector strategies and support the development of the National
Reform Agenda.
80.
The results indicators will measure the development of sector specific strategies
required for the use of EU funds. Improving the coherence and credibility of national strategic
and policy documents, some of which are ex-ante conditionality, will be essential for the
absorption and management of EU funds because individual project proposals need to be
embedded in national strategic documents.
Strengthening Capacity of the Public Sector for Absorption of Funds
81.
The large amount of European Structural and Cohesion Funds available to Croatia
presents a major windfall but poses the challenge of absorption. Once it joins the EU,
Croatia will be obliged to contribute about 6500 million annually to the EU budget; but will have
access to annual EU Structural and Cohesion Funds of about El.5 billion and an additional 6450

23

million in Rural Development Funds, amounting to nearly 33 percent of GDP. Some new
member states have had difficulty in absorbing these funds, ending up as net contributors to the
EU. The Government is keen to avoid a similar fate, and has requested complementary technical
assistance support to ensure the smooth absorption of EU funds.
82.
To accommodate, the Bank will expand its AAA program to facilitate the
Government's EU funds absorption. Through project lending, the Bank has been working on
strengthening the capacity of many public sector ministries and agencies to improve its public
investment management (nature protection, emergency medical services, science and technology,
waste water management, justice, land administration systems etc.) to comply with EU directive
and absorb EU funds. In addition, the Bank is providing specific technical assistance and
carrying out analytical work on the state of Croatia's EU preparedness - looking at how to
increase the level of readiness of selected institutions to utilize EU funds, how to strategically
program for EU Structural Investment Funds, and to highlight bottlenecks to EU funds
absorption process. Additional project investment lending to facilitate structural funds absorption
could be considered in the water and waste water sector or other infrastructure as counterpart
fund support. Innovative lending involving a blend of EC and European Investment Bank
financing in a revolving fund arrangement to support real sector activities could also be
considered.
83.
The Bank is working with the Government to identify policy, institutional and
structural reform gaps, that need to be addressed to ensure the effective utilization of the
EU funds. The proposed arrangements will present an opportunity for Croatia to contract the
World Bank to provide specialist advice, using EU funds to bolster the size and scope of the
Bank's engagement. The AAA-RAS arrangement is only envisaged in the early years of the
2014-2020 programming period. The AAA-RAS engagements will seek to support sector
strategic frameworks, sector policy notes and functional reviews, as well as the development of
processes, and institutional guidelines to develop a solid pipeline of projects and strengthen
project management capacity.
84.
The results indicator to measure Croatia's readiness and capacity to absorb EU
funds will be the project pipeline developed for absorbing EU Funds. The Bank's role in
supporting Croatia's fund absorption is measured by the development of EU-related project
pipeline and the financing mechanisms/framework for EU funding.
Improving Croatia's Regional Cooperation
85.
To help the Government honor its responsibility to protect regional and global
assets that lies within the sovereign domain of Croatia, the Bank will promote regional
cooperation in the areas of water and waste water, waste management and environmental
compliance, transport corridors, and management of the Danube River and the Adriatic Sea. In
the latter context, the Bank is assisting the Government to prepare the GEF Adriatic Sea
Environmental Pollution Control Project for Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, in cooperation
with United Nations Environment Programme Mediterranean Action Plan (UNEP MAP), to
finance demonstration projects that reduce solid waste discharge through leachate treatment and

24

TA for project preparation of priority investments identified in the 'Hot-Spots' assessment.' The
Bank will also seek to discuss mitigation and adaption measures for Croatia in response to the
global climate change agenda. Finally, part of the current portfolio will remain active during the
CPS period and contribute to the regional positioning of Croatia as a gateway to Bosnia and
Herzegovina (Trade and Transport Integration Project) and Hungary and Austria (Rijeka
Gateway Project). The Danube River Basin Water Utilities Trust Fund will provide regional
support to utilities reform, and together with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Adriatic Sea
Project, will pave the way for broader AAA/RAS engagements on water/waste water
management, on waste management and environmental compliance.
III.C. Implementing the FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy
III.C.1.

Financial Envelope

86.
The indicative financing envelope for the FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy
provides for up to US$800 million in lending. For the FY14-17 lending program, DPLs will
continue to play an important role based on the need to combine policy reform with budget
finance. At the same time, Croatia and the Bank intend to explore the use of new investment
financing instruments like results-based operations as the share of traditional investment
financing decreases during the CPS period. Reflecting lessons from previous CPS, flexibility will
be retained in managing IBRD financing, applying the range of World Bank Group instruments,
and addressing areas of engagement in response to global conditions and country priorities. An
indicative front-loaded lending program coupled with a back-loaded AAA-RAS program is
presented below. By their nature, the AAA-RAS engagements require intense dialogue between
three parties and will take time to develop.
87.
Table 4 summarizes the indicative lending program for the first two years of the
CPS. The content of the program for the second part of the CPS period and the overall scope of
Bank partnership will be reviewed and revised as appropriate in the CPS Progress report at midterm of the CPS.
Table 4: Indicative lending program for FY14-15
Policy Support
ERDPL 2
DPL *

Program Support
Health Sector (results-based)
Social Protection (results-based)

Project Support
Railways (investment)

* DPL will be contingent on continued reforms implementation.

88.
During the next four years, IFC expects to invest in Croatia up to US$600 million
from its own account. Through its investments IFC will facilitate Croatia's return to sustainable
economic growth. IFC will seek to provide long-term financing to improve competitiveness of
local export oriented companies, to increase SMEs access to financing, to promote foreign
investors and transfer of know-how and technologies, to support private sector investments in the
infrastructure sectors, and to help Croatian companies to expend their market and invest in the
region.
7 The World Bank Adriatic Sea Hot Spots Assessment 2011.

25

89.
MIGA's outstanding gross exposure in Croatia as of February 28, 2013 was
US$943.6 million in support of an Italian financial institution and a Slovenian investor in the
retail sector.
90.
The CPS addresses only a fraction of the country's external financing needs.
Around 40 percent of Croatia's financing requirements are projected to come from FDI
and portfolio investments with IBRD projected to cover less than 2 percent. Debt service to
the IBRD will remain around 3 percent of total public debt service. Other multilaterals
(European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European Investment Bank, Council of
Europe Bank) have announced increased exposures, so in the CPS, WBG financing will be
geared toward areas outside the scope of other multilateral partners. Additionally, consideration
of exposure limits means delivery of government-selected services will require exploring various
leveraging and cost-sharing options, including from the private sector.
III.C.2.

Partnership and Donor Coordination

91.
Partnership with the European Commission and European Institutions (European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European Investment Bank, Council of Europe
Bank, etc.) is central to the CPS. A partnership between the Bank, the European Commission,
and the Government will be developed to ensure consistency of the various programs
contributing to Croatia's strategic goals. When Croatia becomes a full EU member state, donor
coordination activities will be entirely shifted towards the Ministry of Regional Development
and EU Funds (MRDEUF) as the Managing Authority responsible for coordinating the activities
of member states, the Government and the international financial institutions. Strengthening
MRDEUF capacity for inter-ministerial coordination, and the technical strategy development
capacity of the Implementing Agencies, will be essential.
92.
With the Bank's continuing engagement in support of the Government's reform and
recovery efforts, cooperation with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Directorate
General for Economic and Financial Affairs in the European Commission (DG ECFIN)
will remain critical. As the Bank continues the policy dialogue on structural and institutional
reforms, and the Fund assists with macroeconomic policy advice as part of their Article IV
consultations, the two institutions will coordinate engagement, especially on issues affecting the
country's macroeconomic and competitiveness challenges. This coordination will also involve
DG ECFIN to ensure a consistent dialogue with the authorities on the reform and recovery
agenda.
III.C.3.

Managing Program Implementation

93.
Croatia has made progress in government budget transparency with further
improvements expected. Croatia's score on the Open Budget Index shows that the public is
provided with detailed semi-annual reports on the central Government's budget and financial
activities, but it still remains somewhat difficult to track spending, revenue collection and
borrowing on a timely basis.
94.
Harmonization with the EU, both in legislation and in practice, has advanced and
the public finance management framework provides a solid basis for the Bank's increased
use of Croatia's public financial management systems. Since the 2005 Country Financial

26

Accountability Assessment (CFAA), Croatia took actions supported by the World Bank
Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL) program and the EU, to enact the Law on Financial
Management and Control Systems in the Public Sector 2008 and establish internal audit units
and appoint controllers for all line ministries, as well as for central state organizations, extrabudgetary funds and selected local governments. Consolidation of all government accounts under
the Single Treasury Account improved cash and debt management as well as budget planning
system. The treasury single account now includes all line ministries and the major extra
budgetary funds such as health, pensions and employment.
95.
Croatia has maintained a high level of transparency in government financing,
supported by an effective and independent Supreme Audit institution. Croatia's audit report
(annual audit of Government) is publicly available, and external audits now meet the
requirements of International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) auditing
standards. A long-term development strategy formally adopting INTOSAI and developing audit
tools is in place.
96.
The public sector broadly complies with International Public Sector Accounting
Standards (IPSAS) standards for accounting and reporting. Ministries and other budget
users use a modified accrual basis where revenues are recorded on a cash basis and
expenditures recognized when an invoice has been received. The Government Financial
Management and Information System (FMIS) is being strengthened to include budgetary users
under the Treasury's information system, supported by the Bank Strengthening Accountability
and the Fiduciary Environment Trust Fund (SAFE TF). The authorities present budget plans
based on the ESA95 framework, while Government finance statistics are produced on a monthly
basis and available monthly on the Ministry of Finance website. Data on the operations of local
governments an consolidated general government are available on a quarterly basis, but local
government data are partial. Further improvements are expected in 2013, when data coverage
will expand to include all local governments, railways, and shipyards' guarantees.
97.
The Croatian MOF has prepared a strategy for modernization of the processes in
the State Treasury. The Government is developing specific action plans across various
technical areas of Public Financial Management, and the Bank will actively support the
Government and ensure that this support is in line with the Government's EU accession
priorities. The Bank will continue providing technical support related to the establishment of a
proper fixed assets registry of the Croatian Government and to align this with internationally
recognized practices and standards.
98.
The Public Procurement Act 8 which sets the legal framework for public
procurement in Croatia is aligned with EU Directives. Significant measures were introduced
to strengthen the institutional framework for public procurement in Croatia, for example, the
Directorate for Public Procurement was established in the Ministry of Economy to coordinate the
entire public procurement system; the State Commission for Supervision of Public Procurement
Procedures was established as an autonomous body responsible for deciding on appeals in public
procurement procedures, awarding concessions, and selecting the private partner in PPP projects.
The Public Procurement Act was adopted in 2011 and became effective in January 2012 except certain stipulations
that will become effective on the day of accession.
8

27

The 2012 EC Court of Auditors assessment positively viewed Croatia as meeting the
requirements and commitments in the field of public procurement and is expected to implement
the acquis as of accession. However, further efforts are required in the implementation of the
new public procurement act, especially at local level, with a view to the future management of
structural funds. The fight against local-level corruption also needs to be enhanced particularly in
public procurement, by establishing effective management and control systems.
99.
In the latest 2012 EC Progress Report and 2013 Monitoring Report, harmonization
with the EU environmental acquis and capacity building is assessed positively, although
additional efforts are required for the implementation. Croatia transposed the environmental
acquis into legislation, and it serves as a good safeguards mechanism. The governing Law on
Environment, aligned with the EU environmental acquis, introduced strategic environmental
assessment, strengthened public access to environmental information and environmental liability,
and includes provisions of the SEVESO II and Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control
directive. Basic Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) competence is high and further
strengthened by the adoption of the new Law on the Environmental Protection and secondary
EIA, which achieved full alignment with the EC EIA Directive (85/337/EEC). Regulation on
EIA introduces decentralization of EIA process transferring certain types of projects to county
administrative bodies, implying need for capacity building. The Reports emphasize the need for
additional attention on the quality of environmental impact assessments for all investment
projects, the timely issuing of permits, and the upgrading of the Industrial Pollution Control and
Risk Management installations. Sector environmental analyses are done on a regular basis by the
country itself as well as the EU and are supported by contributions from the Bank and other
international financial institutions.
100.
A Safeguards Diagnostic Review carried out by the Bank compared the legal and
regulatory framework for environmental and social compliance with the Bank's Safeguard
policy 4.00. The review (Equivalency Analysis) found acceptable equivalence between the
Croatian system and World Bank policies on Environmental Assessment (EA) and Natural
Habitats. The few potential gaps, which should rarely arise, could be addressed on a case-by-case
basis. The Croatian system is also fully equivalent to Bank policies on Physical Cultural Property
and on Forests, and equivalent to major parts of the Pest Management and Dam Safety policies.
However, the Analysis concluded that Croatia's regulatory framework is not fully in line with
Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement. Closer monitoring, and supervision of projects
triggering the Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is warranted.
101.
The EU has emphasized the need for strengthening administrative capacity and
timely allocation of financial resources for implementing environmental acquis as two
major challenges. The Bank is working directly with the Ministry of Environment and Nature
Protection on strengthening institutional capacity through the implementation of the EU Natura
2000 Integration Project and the GEF Adriatic Sea Environmental Pollution Control Project
under preparation. Specifically, apart from the capacity building at the central ministerial level,
the EU Natura 2000 Integration project is also instrumental at building the absorption capacity
for EU grant resources at the county and parks level.

28

IV.

Managing Risks

102.
The significant risks to the outcomes identified in the CPS need to be closely
monitored within a flexible but active program framework. Croatia's economy is exposed to
shocks of global adjustment and European deleveraging through multiple transmission
mechanisms. Moreover, delivery of the outcomes envisioned under the program will require
coordination across sectors, ministries, with the private sector and among various levels of
government. As achieving program outcomes naturally requires sustained efforts at policy
coordination, fine tuning and implementation, the prospect and achievement of EU memberships
can lead to policy complacency at a critical time, as demonstrated by other new member states in
the recent past. The mid-term review of the CPS and the Progress Report will need to be thought
through with a view to adapt the CPS based on the achievements of the first two years of
implementation. Each risk is described in more detail. The CPS mid-term review (MTR),
planned in end FY15 or early FY16, will assess the evolution of Croatia two years after
accession and confirm the relevance of the CPS program.
103.
Croatia continues to be exposed to high external risks, notably affected by severe
economic downturn in Europe and the world. The trade in goods and services which
accompanies Croatia's position as a gateway to Europe has been affected by the crisis, as have
Croatia's traditional export industries that rely on buoyant external demand. At the same time,
the shrinking balance sheets of the large European banking institutions will indirectly impact the
availability of loanable funds through their subsidiaries in Croatia, particular as the level of
Croatian NPLs rise. Lower FDI means less technology transfer which will in turn affect future
growth. These external risks are recognized and embodied in the CPS. The WBG will monitor
and engage through policy dialogue with the authorities, at the same time, innovative ways to
support private sector growth opportunities are being explored through partial credit guarantees
and risk sharing mechanisms to maintain commercial lending levels, particularly to competitive
exporting firms, so that deleveraging does as little harm to productive firms as possible.
104. Policy design and implementation of a program of such ambitious objectives
requiring comprehensive rather than sector by sector reforms involves a high level of
coordination. Indeed, one of the challenges for any government attempting to steer the country
in an agreed direction of reform is the coordination of 476 separate local governments entities in
21 counties in such a small country - have made top down implementation difficult in many
areas (e.g. for hospital, court, schools, water utility rationalization). In addition, when developing
effective programs to reform entitlements coupled with activities to shift employment to private
sector rather than public sector activities, coordination across sectors and ministries at all levels
of government is required. Currently, it is difficult to coordinate and convene different actors to
comprehensively address issues. This is partially reflected in the marginally satisfactory
performance of the current Bank portfolio. The Bank and Government need to remain vigilant to
monitor the CPS progress. Strengthening the Joint Portfolio Review mechanisms and applying
reinforced project restructuring, including partial cancellation of funds, should help mitigate the
implementation obstacles. The CPS also proposes more frequent reviews of the portfolio, jointly
with Government, as needed to bring the portfolio on track. Selectivity of areas of engagement in
the current CPS, primarily driven by project ownership, should also alleviate the challenges of
portfolio performance.

29

105.
There is a possibility that even upon the EU accession reforms may slow down.
Croatia's negotiations with the EU brought a significant number of difficult policy issues on the
table, including institutional and structural issues, and the country struggled to pursue adequate
reforms to meet the EU obligations, including major changes in the legislative and institutional
frameworks related to the judiciary, agriculture and state aid. However, after a certain period of
important reforms, a slowdown in the reform pace can destabilize even the earlier achievements.
While Croatia has experienced delays and at times setbacks in implementing reforms, such as for
shipyard restructuring or for civil service de-politicization, there is a possibility that reforms may
slow down upon the EU accession, as was evidenced in the case of some other member states.
Should Croatia enter the EU with weak macro fundamentals, the EC will implement a strong
monitoring framework under the Excessive Deficit Procedure. Many of the Commission's
mechanism to align Croatian policies to EU-related goals are broadly consistent with many of the
CPS results indicators. Hence, ensuring the close collaboration and partnership with the EC will
be crucial for Bank activities in the FY14-17 CPS period.

30

Country Partnership Strategy for FY2014-2017
Annex 1: Results Matrix
Country Development Goals

Issues and Obstacles

WBG Instruments and
PartruAtvts

Expected CPS Objectives and Indicators

Partner Activities

Pillar I: Public Finance
Theme 1: Ensuring Fiscal Consolidation for Macroeconomic Sustainability
Increasing tax revenues while
decreasing fiscal expenditures

* High level of public spending

and of public debt
* Croatia needs to improve tax
compliance

1. Improving sustainability of revenue
enhancing policy as indicated by:
* Improved tax gap as a percentage of total
GDP
Baseline:
Target:

2.7% (2012)
2.0% (2017)

WBG
Ongoing activities:
* ERDPL2
* RAMP

Planned activities:
* Tax Administration
project
* DPL
* Debt Advisory
Partners:
* EC Macro-monitoring
* IMF Article IV

Ensuring sustainability of social
spending

* Social assistance programs are

not well targeted to the most
vulnerable groups and a large
number of categorical.
entitlmbent rog
inc
s
entitlement programs increases
spending on social assistance

2. Improving the targeting of social
WBG
assistance programs as indicated by:
Ongoing activities:
Means-tested programs as a share of all * ERDPL2
social assistance programs increased
Baseline:
Target:

16%(2012)
20% (2017)

Planned activities:
oilPoeto
. Protection
* Social
proj ect
* DPL
* Activation TA
Partners:

*

EC

31

Country Development Goals
Improving efficiency of the
health system

Issues and Obstacles
*

Unsustainable level of health
spending at 7.8% of GDP near
the top for EU12 member
states

Expected CPS Objectives and Indicators
3. Introducing cost rationalization measures
in the health sector as indicated by:
Total public accrual health spending
reduced

Inefficient hospital services
and high costs of long-term
care services provided by
hospitals

Baseline:
Target:

*

6 6% (preliminary,2012)
6.1% (2017)

Further rationalization and reorganization
of hospital system
Baseline:

Target:

6 beds used for hospital
admissions per 1000 inhabitants
(2012)
5 beds used for hospital
admissions per 1000
inhabitants9 (2017)

WBG Instruments and
PartruAtvts
Partner Activities

WBG
Ongoing activities:
9 ERDPL2
* Development of
Emergency Medical
Services and Investment
Planning
Planned activities:
* Health project
* DPL
Partners:
* EC
* CEB

Pillar II: Competitiveness
Theme 1: Promoting Public Enterprises Restructuring
Enhancing the capacity of public
enterprises, in railway and
energy sectors, to enable faster
convergence towards operational

and financial performance of
EU27

cunte

*

Railway companies will be
affected by a new market
structure, reduced subsidies,
and the challenge of absorbing

4. Contributing to the coherence and
implementation of strategic plans in railway
and energy sectors as indicated by:
Implementation of restructuring plans for

WBG
Ongoing activities:
9 Railway Policy Note
* Croatia Energy Sector

EU funds
*term
uendere

sorneto

railway sector companies and mediumstrategy for the rail sector consistent
with the EU 2014-20 funding period

Review
Planned activities:
* Railway Lending

undertake important
9 Excluding day care beds

32

Country Development Goals

Issues and Obstacles
adjustments to become
financially and
environmentally sustainable as
to prepare for a highly
competitive EU

Expected CPS Objectives and Indicators

WBG Instruments and

Implementation of Croatia Energy Strategy
2009-20 related to the renewable energy
and district heating

PartruAtvts
Partner Activities
9 TA for Public
Enterprise Reform
Partners:
9 EBRD

Baseline:

*

Revised restructuring plans of
railway companies

EC

Energy Strategy in place
(2012);
Target:

Railway Modal Strategy 20142020 and medium term
contracts in place for
Passenger Services and
Infrastructure Management
consistent with the strategy
Action plan adopted for feedin tariffs for renewable energy
resources and for improving
the efficiency of the district
heating sector.

Theme 2: Strengthening Doing Business
Strengthening the effectiveness
of judiciary as to promote
enabling environment for doing
business

*

Croatia still has a high backlog
of court cases, above the EU
average, resulting in lengthy
duration of proceedings

5. Improving efficiency and reducing
arrears in the judicial system as indicated by:
Case backlog in judiciary decreased

WBG
Ongoing activities:
Integrated Land
Administration System
project

33

Country Development Goals

Issues and Obstacles

WBG Instruments and

Expected CPS Objectives and Indicators
Baseline:
Target:

498,601 (2012)
300,000 (2017)

PartruAtvts
Partner Activities

Justice Sector Support
project
* ERDPL2
Planned activities:
* TA on Public
Administration
* DPL
Partners:
* EC
*

Theme 3: Promoting Private Sector-Led Growth
Increasing use of renewable
sources and promoting energy
efficiency - in line with Europe
2020 Strategy

Croatia needs to increase the
share of renewable energy in
final energy consumption, and
achieve an increase in energy
efficiency to reduce

6. Contributing to diversity and security of
energy supply by financing energy efficiency
and renewable energy projects as indicated
dineiadse cuit:f
by:6.eCotrcesbut inty
Share of installed renewable energy

greenhouse gas emission

rsucsapitinesd:support

WBG
Ongoing activities:
9 lC investment in a
Bwind farm
* lC financing to

renewable
energy projects

Baseline:
Target:

Planned activities:
lFC financing

180 MW (2012)
354 MW (2017)

renewable energy and
*

GHG emission
decreased:
Baseline:
Target:

as

tCO 2

equivalent

0 (2013)
0.32 million (2017)

energy efficiency
proj ects
Partners:
* EBRD
* EC

34

Country Development Goals
Improving growth through
support to the private sector,
primarily SMEs and FDI

Issues and Obstacles
*

Croatia needs to ensure
favorable conditions for
private sector investments,
notably for SMEs, to enhance
their competitiveness

Expected CPS Objectives and Indicators
7. Supporting competitive local companies
to expand in the region and increase exports
as indicated by:
Level of exports of beneficiary companies

Baseline:
Target:

HRK 4.35 billion (2011)
At least preserve the level of
exports (2017)

WBG Instruments and
PartruAtvts
Partner Activities

WBG
Ongoing activities:
* Export Finance
Intermediation Loan
* IFC investments
(Atlantic, Agrokor,
Clos)
9 REPARIS
Planned activities:
* Croatia Export
Financing Guarantee
Project
* IFC financing to export
oriented companies,
SMEs, private sector
infrastructure
investments, FDIs and
regional initiatives
* REPARIS'o
Partners:
* EIB
* CEB

* KfW

10Road

to Europe Program of Accounting Reforms and Institutional Strengthening

35

WBG Instruments and
Country Development Goals

Issues and Obstacles

Expected CPS Objectives and Indicators

PartruAtvts
Partner Activities

Pillar III: EU Membership
Theme 1: Maximizing the Benefits of EU Membership
Preparing National Reform
Program for effective use of EU
Funds

Croatia needs to prepare
National Reform Program for
EU 2014-2020 programming
period, and Operational
Programs, as well as a number
of sector strategies in support
of priority project applications
for financing from EU Funds

8. Improving coherence and credibility of
national strategic and policy documents
needed for the EU funds absorption and
management as indicated by:
uments,
including sector specific strategies, needed
for the use of EU Funds, adopted by
relevant authorities
Baseline:
Target:

no documents in place (2012)
Sector strategies adopted: (i)
National Education, Science
and Technology Strategy; (ii)
National Innovation Strategy;
(iii) Research and Innovation
Strategy for Smart
Specialization; (iv) Policy
advice/recommendations in the
areas of irrigation, rural
development, transport, SME
and water/environment sector;
(v) National Technical and
Economic Study for
Management of Wastewater

WBG
Ongoing activities:
9 Eu Preane

TA

9 EU Natura 2000
Integration
- Integrated Land
Administration System
*

Science and

Technology 2
Planned activities:
EU Water sector
compliance Project
Partners
EC

Treatment Sludge (2017)
Strengthening capacity of public

*Croatia

needs to improve the

9. Contributing to Croatia's readiness and

WBG

capacity to build the project pipeline for

Ongoing activities:

sector for the absorption of EU

capacity to prepare full-scale

Structural Funds

projects for funding, and public

absorbing EU Funds in selected sectors as

investment management of the

indicated by:*

E

rprdesT

EU Preparedness TA

36

Country Development Goals

Issues and Obstacles
EU-funded project

WBG Instruments and

Expected CPS Objectives and Indicators
*

Number and value of project applications
prepared and/or submitted for financing
from EU Funds in research and innovation
and nature protection
Baseline:
Target:

PartruAtvts
Partner Activities

Entire WB portfolio
Partners
* EC
*

no project proposals (2012)
(i) At least 6 project
applications for financing in
research, development and
innovation sector, for the total
value of projects amounting
to f 50 million; (ii) At least
25 project applications for
financing in the nature
protection sector, for the total
value of projects amounting

to f 50 million (2017)

37

Annex 2: Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report for FYO9-FY13

Date of CPS: September 30, 2008 - Date of CPS Progress Report: September 19, 2011

1.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was prepared in the midst of Croatia's
negotiations for European Union (EU) membership, and right before the financial crisis
hit the country. The stable growth that Croatia enjoyed in the years prior to this CPS,
averaging four percent, was discontinued at the end of 2008. Increasing economic decline
continued during the CPS period, at the end of which Croatia hit the fourth year of recession.
This setting was at times aggravated by an uneven and lengthy EU accession process. After
almost six years, Croatia closed the negotiations in June 2011 and signed the accession treaty
that December, which led to a positive outcome of the EU entry referendum. Croatia now
expects to become the 28th EU member state in July 2013. Therefore, the World Bank and
the Government agreed to extend the current strategy by one year so that the next CPS is
aligned with country's first four years of membership.
Overview of Program Achievements
2.
The CPS was centered on Croatia's goal of joining the EU, with a flexible
program that was rapidly adjusted when the crisis broke out. The program was set to
help accelerate Croatia's income convergence with those of other member states. It
envisaged $300 million of annual lending under a base case scenario of investment loans,
with a provision for possible development policy loans (DPLs), under an 'upside' lending
scenario of about $400 million per year. As the crisis hit, about half of the Bank's total
lending of $1.1 billion went to budget support. The two DPLs responded to Croatia's
evolving financing needs and supported the Government's Economic Recovery Program. The
first single-tranche DPL addressed most urgent short-term measures through rationalized
public expenditures and strengthened crisis management and financial sector regulation,
while the Economic Recovery DPL supported the medium-term reform efforts for fiscal
consolidation and fostering private sector growth. Moreover, a $202 million line of credit for
exporters through the Croatian Bank for Reconstruction and Development (HBOR) were
added to the program and helped private sector companies maintain their export levels and
workforce.
3.
Through partnership with Government and EU stakeholders, the CPS assisted in
preparing Croatia's public sector institutions to assume EU membership. The lending
program funded many activities required to close some of the EU negotiations chapters. In
agriculture, the institutions and systems have been set and capacitated to implement the
Common Agricultural Policy and use the EU funds, and specialized agencies were equipped
and aligned with the EU agricultural and rural development requirements12 . In judiciary,
several projects helped improve the efficiency of the sector, through reduction of case
backlog, upgrading the land registry and cadastre systems, and improving the efficiency and

11

The extension of the CPS that originally covered FY2009-2012 by one year has been agreed upon through an exchange of
letters.
12
UnderAgriculturalAcquis Cohesion Project (AACP).

38

transparency of courts1 3 . Further, the Bank-funded activities helped transpose EU legislation,
capacitate the public institutions for absorption of pre-accession and post-accession funds,
and made direct investments in EU-required infrastructure in particular in the environment
sector.
4.
Against the challenging context of the crisis and uneven reform pace, the
achievements made under this CPS are assessed as moderately satisfactory. The program
proved to be very relevant to country goals and achieved most critical CPS objectives to a
good extent. These objectives helped the Government address key priorities, in particular
maintaining macroeconomic stability in the context of a severe crisis and closing the EU
negotiations. Croatia initiated the fiscal consolidation through a strengthened legislation
framework, rationalization of expenditures and reduction of arrears. It improved the
efficiency of the social sectors, with reduction of pension costs and reduced health spending,
while initiating better targeting of vulnerable groups in the social welfare sector. Though
some CPS outcomes were not fully achieved, due to the crisis and as a result of project
implementation delays, most major outcomes were met. Demanding requirements for Chapter
23 on Judiciary and Fundamental Rights were substantially met. Croatia has been
implementing the judiciary reform measures with continued success and steady
improvements in efficiency indicators, and has, among other, reduced a significant case
backlog. Finally, a substantial alignment with the EU was among achieved CPS outcomes,
such as in the agricultural and environment sectors.
Progress towards Croatia's Development Goals
5.
Severe economic decline and the country's strong commitment to the EU
accession have marked the CPS period. This environment has not only shaped Croatia's
priorities but it also dictated its political context. On the one side, attending to the EU
accession goals required a laborious approach in meeting the EU acquis communautaire
requirements to close all the benchmarks. Even if the bulk of the work was carried out by the
governing administration, the opposition was on board, through the parliamentary work, and
in particular as it was heading the parliamentary committee for tracking the progress of EU
accession negotiations during the 2008-2011 parliamentary term. Political parties remained
united around the European goal and shared its accomplishment. In parallel to this essentially
administrative work, Croatia was expected to prepare its public and private sector to face a
highly competitive EU economy with income levels much higher than its own. This required
a different kind of political and public consensus, around major reforms. However, a fierce
financial and economic crisis caught Croatia largely unprepared and the convergence and
competitiveness goal was swiftly replaced by a crucial need to maintain macroeconomic
stability and protect those most affected.
6.
The authorities succeeded to maintain the country's macroeconomic stability
throughout the prolonged recession. With Croatia's high external debt, reliance on tourism
sector and exports to Europe, the authorities undertook rapid economic recovery measures to
prevent further deterioration. Croatia's convergence gap with EU 27 widened by about 3
percent since the 2008 crisis and the country has lost 10 percent of its output. The
13

Under Real Property Registrationand CadastreProject (RPRCP), IntegratedLand AdministrationSystem (ILAS) Project,
Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL), Fiscal, Social and Financial DPL (FSF DPL) and Economic Recovery DPL
(ERDPL).

39

Government adopted the Economic Recovery Program in April 2010 to redefine the role of
the state through fiscal consolidation, public administration reform, restructuring of lossmakers, and privatization, as well as to support economic recovery through judicial and labor
market reforms and removing bottlenecks to investments. Rationalization measures were
taken in pensions and other social sectors, while mitigating the effects on the most
vulnerable, and the parliament approved a spending freeze in 2011 and 2012, keeping it
constant at 2010 level. While fiscal policy in 2011 contained negative consequences of the
recession, the consolidation continued in 2012 under the framework of the Fiscal
Responsibility Act. The 2012-2014 budget managed to reduce the general government fiscal
deficit to preliminary 3.8 percent in 2012. The deficit reduction was achieved through
spending cuts of 1.5 percentage point of GDP.
7.
In 2012, the Government adopted a Structural Reform Matrix to support
macroeconomic stability and recovery. The Government's objective to ensure
sustainability of public finances and regain the confidence of investors, together with
restoring the credit rating remains a priority, especially since the crisis in the euro area has
affected the recovery prospects. Moreover, the authorities recognized the need to accelerate
structural reforms to stimulate recovery and growth. The Structural Reform Matrix aims to:
(i) secure macroeconomic stability through improved fiscal governance and sector spending
reforms; (ii) strengthen government effectiveness and the rule of law; (iii) adjust labor market
conditions; and (iv) strengthen competitiveness and innovation, by reducing the
administrative barriers, promoting R&D agenda and finalizing the privatization. The
implementation however may prove difficult given that some of the affected groups have
expressed opposition to the reforms.
8.
On the EU accession front, Croatia made two major accomplishments - progress
in judiciary and anticorruption reforms and meeting the requirements of the
competition policy. The EU's endorsement of the implementation pace and results achieved
under the justice reform led to a conclusion of EU talks. Major changes were undertaken as
part of the implementation of 2008 and 2011 Judicial Reform Strategies, ranging from the
legislation framework reform, the rationalization of the judicial network, improved efficiency
of the judiciary, to the strengthening of human resources planning and management.
Institutional overhaul of the judiciary sector took place, with reforms of the State Judicial
Council and State Prosecutorial Council, which resulted in an improved independence,
accountability and professionalization of the judiciary. With regard to the fight against
corruption, an adequate legal and institutional framework was put in place, and Croatian
judiciary raised and processed high corruption cases, including prosecuting former high level
Government officials or business executives. The EC's Monitoring Report of March 2013
acknowledges continued good track record of implementation of the anticorruption cases and
that the law enforcement bodies remain pro-active. Finally, Croatia also met the EU
requirements for the competition policy. This process was confirmed by a positive opinion of
the European Commission related to privatization and/or restructuring of the three large stateowned shipyards that were facing problems and losses over the past decade.
Highlights of Progress in Achieving CPS Outcomes
Sustaining Macroeconomic Stability
9.
Croatia managed to contain its macroeconomic stability in the context of its
fourth year in recession. After revenue fall during the global crisis, which led Croatia's
40

deficit to surge to above 5.0 percent of GDP in 2010 and 2011, the Government managed to
address large fiscal imbalances. General government deficit is preliminary at 3.8 percent of
GDP for 2012, due to increased revenues (VAT increase and improved tax compliance) and
reductions in subsidies, maintenance and capital spending. The Bank's Fiscal, Social and
Financial Sector DPL (FSF DPL) supported short-term fiscal consolidation efforts, by
reducing the wage bill, general government investment, health sector arrears and pension
spending, while maintaining adequate spending on unemployment benefits and increased
means-tested social support allowance to mitigate the social impact.
10.
Croatia's fiscal sustainability is improved through expenditure-based
consolidation in pension systems and health spending. Supported by the Economic
Recovery DPL (ERDPL), the Government reduced the privileged pensions by 20 percent.
Privileged pensions for government officials were abolished, and rationalized for military
employees. Administrative costs of the second pillar were reduced in 2010 and 2011 through
a reduction of mandatory pension funds' asset management fee from 0.75 percent to 0.45
percent. Progress was made in rationalizing the health spending through a number of
measures including streamlining pharmaceutical spending and decreasing co-payment
exemptions by 36 percent.
11.
Reforms in tax administration, with improved tax compliance and tax collection
contribute to enhancing efficiency of public finances. Most importantly, Croatian Tax
Administration improved the tax compliance from 84 percent to 87 percent between 2007 and
2011. The e-taxation increased significantly from 8 percent in 2010 to 52 percent in 2012.
The Tax Administration has improved its business processes, and focuses on clearing the tax
arrears. The new tax arrears have been slightly reduced each year. Under the Revenue
Administration Modernization Project (RAMP), the Large Taxpayers Office (LTO) has been
established as a separate unit, to focus its efforts on large taxpayers that represent some 600
entities covering about 46 percent of taxes and contributions, and this is expected to further
increase tax compliance.
Improving the Outcomes in Social Sectors
12.
Croatia initiated reform measures to improve the efficiency and quality in the
social assistance system, though a substantial agenda remains. During the crisis, the
Government simplified the different social protection programs at central and local levels to
enhance administrative efficiency. The Bank's analytical work Social Impact of the Crisis
and Building Resilience, the support by the ERDPL and the Social Welfare Development
Project (SWDP), informed these measures as well as a new Social Welfare Law, introduced
to reduce social exclusion and improve targeting and efficiency. The policy dialogue under
the proposed ERDPL 2 is assisting the Government in conceiving a major overhaul in the
social safety nets, starting with reinforcing the means-testing for major social benefits
programs. The management information system, built under SWDP and recently adjusted, is
currently used for data exchange among various institutions and means-testing of all social
benefits in the centers of social welfare in Zagreb.
13.
Performance of the education system was substantially improved, through
strengthened institutions and improved management. Under the Education Sector
Development Project (ESDP), a new curriculum framework for pre-school, primary and
secondary schools was developed, allowing the teachers a more adaptive approach in the
classroom. Establishment of the national center for external evaluation and successful
introduction of a school exit exam - matura at the end of secondary school are important
41

measures in getting towards improvement of student learning. Croatian students score slightly
below OECD countries in PISA, but subtle improvements are noticeable in matura results
between 2010 and 2011. Croatia managed to reduce the number of triple-shift schools, and it
strengthened its education sector management and planning tools; still more work is ahead in
ensuring systemic and regular training for advancing the teachers' skills, critical to influence
the students' learning results.
Promoting Private Sector Growth and Convergence
14.
Croatia's progress in creating an enabling environment for the private sector has
been partial and more systemic reforms are needed. Reforms in public administration,
which are considered essential in creating conditions for private sector-led growth, have been
delayed and the administration costs for society are high compared to the quality of services
delivered. The policy changes made towards professionalization of the civil service,
supported through ProgrammaticAdjustment Loan 2 (PAL2), aimed at nurturing a competent
and professional civil service, were reversed in 2012, except for the positions of secretary
general in ministries and deputy director of smaller state administrative organizations. Longdelayed improvements in human resources management system were initiated under the
ERDPL, which supported establishment of the central payroll and HR registry that improved
the management of budgetary resources. The project also supported amendments to the Civil
Service Law to strengthen the appraisal system and help retain the highly skilled in public
administration. However, reforms that would introduce a performance-based remuneration
system are postponed and remain difficult, constrained by high opposition from the trade
unions. Notwithstanding, the Government made decisive steps to harmonize the salary
system among various administrative bodies and entities in public administration, which
represents progress towards establishing 'equal pay for equal job' principle among jobs with
similar complexity and competences across the administration, regardless of the legal status
of the entity.
15.
In the judiciary, Croatia achieved substantial progress in improving efficiency
and reducing the court case backlog. The EU negotiations were an important engine for
keeping the pace in pursuing the judicial reforms. Under the ERDPL, the Government
launched a major enforcement system reform, which succeeded to reduce a large case
backlog and removed enforcement of uncontestable cases away from judges. The reduction
in court case backlog was also supported by PAL2, the Real Property Registration and
CadastreProject (RPRCP)and continued under the ongoing IntegratedLand Administration
System Project and Justice Sector Support Project(JSSP). RPRCP helped reduce the backlog
in land registration by 80 percent. The EC's last Monitoring Report of March 2013,
acknowledges this major achievement, stating that in 2012 the courts succeeded to resolve
more cases than the influx. The JSSP supports these efforts through upgrading the Integrated
Case Management System, designed to generate data analytics on performance of various
judiciary indicators, and has helped establish the system of court and justice performance
indicators, thus increasing the accountability and transparency of judicial system.
16.
Progress on privatization has been made, while the measures taken to improve
business environment are not yet effective. Overall, administrative barriers continue to
hinder businesses and are considered as a critical obstacle for foreign and domestic investors.
However, the Government took measures to liquidate state-owned enterprises, while the
restructuring of shipyards was addressed as part of the EU chapter on Competition. Under
Trade and Transport Integration (TTI) and Rijeka Gateway (RG) projects, the state also
continued to decrease its ownership in the two strategic ports, in Ploce and Rijeka, and
42

secured private sector investments for operation of port terminals through concession
agreements. Steps have been taken to eliminate investment barriers by simplifying the
business registration and reducing its cost, under ERDPL, and legislative changes are in
process to abolish the location permit and establish e-construction permit. Real Property
Registration and CadastreProject and IntegratedLand Administration System (ILAS) Project
supported reductions in transactions processing time and harmonization of data in land
registry and cadastre with the situation on the ground. Still, further decisive measures and a
more systemic approach are needed to make a full and visible impact on the ground.
17.
Croatia made good progress in the R&D sector in promoting cooperation
between research institutions and industry, albeit with still low levels of R&D spending.
Under the Science and Technology Project (STP), major R&D institutions in Croatia were
able to commercialize research results, through patenting, research contract, spillovers and
license agreements, concluded for instance with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and Brown University. This has brought knowledge institutions closer to the business sector
and opened the opportunity for cooperation of researchers and the business sector, which was
earlier seen as contentious. It also mobilized private sector R&D through participation in
R&D financing for innovative SMEs, which increased the share of SMEs with new or
improved products 4. R&D financing thus contributes to the higher-level objectives of
increasing competiveness of Croatian firms and integration with the EU. As Croatia
intensified the preparations for the EU Funds, STP helped leverage about EUR40 million of
IPA and other EU funds in R&D. While the paradigm of R&D expenditures share between
the public and private sector is no longer so prominent in the EU, the overall R&D
expenditure levels of 3 percent of GDP per Europe 2020 Strategy remain. Croatia will thus
need to increase its R&D spending levels from current only 0.8 and the EU funds present an
important opportunity for this endeavor.
18.
During FYO9-12, IFC was largely supporting the local companies in increasing
competitiveness, with a focus on green energy and long-term funding. IFC has invested
$194 million in Croatia supporting the local companies to become more competitive and
expand in the region, while promoting green energy. Together with syndication partners, IFC
promoted generation and use of green energy in Croatia through its EUR 55 million
financing of a 43.7 MW green-field wind power plant near the city of Sibenik, sponsored by
RP Global, Austria. Through its EUR40 million investment to CMC Sisak, IFC helped postprivatization restructuring of the company and supported it to strengthen the supply chains
and improve environmental standards. To support investors with much needed long-term
funds for infrastructure projects during the crisis, IFC, through its Infrastructure Crisis
Facility, committed about $70 million in Croatia. In FY13, given deleveraging of European
banks and overall low international capital flows to Croatia, IFC substantially increased its
program in the country. As of May 2013, IFC has invested about $100 million and is
expected to invest $83 million more by the end of this fiscal year. Through its financing IFC
is supporting local companies to be more competitive and increase exports, helping Croatia to
improve diversity and security of energy supply, and supporting infrastructure privatization
project (Zagreb airport).
19.
IFC has also invested in three regional projects in the Western Balkans,
including in Croatia. These were: (i) EUR 25 million equity investment in Triglav, the
14

EU Community Innovation Survey

43

largest insurance company operating in the Western Balkans; (ii) EUR20 million loan to
Scholz, a regional leader in metal scrap recycling industry, to help the company in its
regional expansion and enhancement of its E&S standards; and (iii) EUR126 million to
Gorenje, a regional household appliance manufacturer in the Western Balkans. Finally, IFC
financed EUR40 million loan to Frikom, Croatia Agrokor's ice-cream and frozen food
subsidiary in Serbia, for investments in new processing and cooling equipment, storages and
fruit and vegetable farms.
Supporting Long-Term Development
20.
Croatia is making good progress in aligning its environmental agenda to EU
requirements. As part of the EU accession agreement, Croatia needs to increase the water
supply coverage, the quality of wastewater services and maintain the coastal waters quality in
line with EU standards. The Coastal Cities Pollution Control Project (CCPCP) helped
establish the monitoring program of seawater quality, and reduce the waste load in the
Adriatic Sea directly connecting about 220,000 people to wastewater network. This project
was the first in a programmatic 15 series designed to maintain the quality of coastal water at
current high level, meeting the EU standards. The Inland Waters (IW) Project has supported
wastewater investments in inland municipalities, but also helped analyze the institutional
options in water supply and wastewater sector, which will be essential to pursue the
agglomeration of the water and sewerage utilities in line with the EU water directives. The
project supported preparation of documentation needed for the project applications to absorb
future EU funds, which is considerable given that estimated investments that Croatia needs to
undertake in the environmental sector amount to EUR 3 billion. In nature conservation,
Croatia will have to meet the requirements of the Birds and Habitats Directives, the EU's
main legal instruments for biodiversity protection. The ongoing EU Natura 2000 Integration
project has assisted Croatia to implement Natura 2000 (EU network of protected areas)
objectives in investments and strengthen capacity for EU-compliant reporting and
biodiversity monitoring.
21.
In agriculture, Croatia made good alignment with the EU acquis communautaire.
The AgriculturalAcquis Cohesion Project (AACP) supported EU accession negotiations in
agriculture, representing one of the most challenging chapters. The project helped the
Government build the institutional capacity and strengthen the management and information
systems for implementation of the EU Common Agriculture Policy and the use of preaccession and post-accession funds. From supporting the establishment of the EU Paying
Agency, and developing the capacity of the Croatian Food Agency to apply EU acquis
procedures, to building the land parcel information system and upgrading the veterinary
institutes, these efforts were closely linked with the Chapter 12 benchmarks, until the EC
reaffirmed a satisfactory level of harmonization with EU requirements.
World Bank Performance
Program Performance Rating
22.
The report assesses the Bank's performance as moderately satisfactory. The Bank
was successful in setting the design of the strategy, its relevance and alignment with country
development goals - the EU accession efforts. It has remained well-positioned during the
15 Adaptable

Program Lending for Coastal Cities Pollution Control
44

country's EU negotiations phases in assisting these efforts through policy advice, technical
assistance, capacity building and project preparation. The flexibility to respond to the
Government's request at the time of the financial crisis was also adequate. The less
successful aspect of design was an ambitious results framework and lack of mechanism to
monitor the achievement of CPS objectives. In spite of that, a solid program was delivered
and a proactive monitoring of project implementation led to good progress in achieving most
major results envisaged. The Bank has also succeeded in building a good partnership with the
new Government and agreeing on a solid program of ongoing activities for the next strategy
period.
Design
23.
The CPS focused on two challenges: (i) completion of the EU accession process
and (ii) convergence of the country's income levels with that of EU member states. The
first challenge was to assist in compliance with increasingly complex EU requirements,
ranging from institutional and legislative harmonization, to investments, and capacity for
management of EU funds. The Bank and the Government identified most critical EU areas
among the CPS priorities, notably, judiciary and agriculture, environment and
competitiveness. The second challenge, focused on addressing structural reforms, had a
twofold agenda. The first was to improve the public finance and address selected
inefficiencies in the public sector, including social sector, public administration and judiciary.
The other tackled the enabling environment needed to kick off the growth generated by the
private sector. The convergence objective was supported through policy lending and a series
of investment operations in selected sectors. Analytical work complemented the policy
lending and helped prepare grounds for new legislation, such as the new Fiscal Responsibility
Act".
24.
A flexible design of the CPS allowed the Bank to make timely program
adjustments. At the peak of the crisis, the Government sought Bank financing to help
mitigate the impact of the crisis. A $300 million single tranche DPL was approved in FY10,
and a $213 million DPL - the first in a programmatic series - was added to the program in
FY11, in support of the Government's economic recovery measures. A financial
intermediation loan to HBOR helped the exporting private companies strengthen their longterm business opportunities, and ride out the crisis. The project disbursed the majority of
funds in less than three years, and in a context of a prolonged recession, HBOR sought
additional funding. Hence a $67 million loan was approved to HBOR in FY13. The Bank and
HBOR are currently discussing support to the real economy through a guarantee operation to
support HBOR's future bond issuance.
25.
The Bank remained less intensively engaged in several specific areas where
commitment to reforms proved difficult over the earlier CPS. These areas include public
administration reform, railways and shipyard restructuring, as well as the energy sector. The
first two areas had proven extremely difficult to address without full political commitment.
The Bank's engagement in these areas was limited to the activities supported through policy
lending, and recent re-engagement on the Railway Policy Note with the new Government.
The Bank opted to discontinue the engagement in the energy sector, upon completion of
several smaller scale projects, as there was no interest to undertake major reforms needed to
Under FiscalResponsibility FrameworkPolicy Note. Labor and Pension Policy Notes have provided impetus
for the new government to launch the labor and pension reform supported under the ERDPL2.
16

45

sustain the systems. However, the engagement with the current Government, and the
challenges posed by the need to increase the country's competitiveness as it becomes an EU
member have opened discussions on all three fronts - indicating possible future engagement
through knowledge and advisory activities.
26.
The CPS results matrix reflects well the strategic program objectives and
enables the Bank and the Government to assess the impact of Bank interventions.
Originally consisting of 19 CPS outcomes, the results matrix was revised at mid-term to
reflect major restructuring of several projects. This included reformulation of outcomes
and/or downsizing of some of the targets that were assessed as overly ambitious. Several
outcomes were split as they were considered overly complex or dropped as the interventions
did not materialize. This revision could have been taken to a further step because some of the
outcomes remained complex, and few could not be directly influenced by Bank projects (for
instance, increase in R&D spending by private sector or as a share of GDP, or improving
agricultural productivity). A more selective approach and fewer CPS outcomes are advisable
and would facilitate monitoring of the progress. Overall, majority of outcomes are clearly
linked with country's objectives and the Bank interventions are able to influence them.
27.
The CPS risk analysis was appropriate and identified three critical areas external vulnerability, public administration capacity and uneven reform pace. High
external debt and deficit levels left Croatia prone to unfavorable external developments, and
its economy was severely affected by the global crisis. The capacity of public administration
to prepare projects and carry out the implementation in a timely manner has been challenged
throughout the CPS period. In recent years, the Bank-funded projects have been facing a
paradox. The projects directly linked with the EU agenda are attended to with close care.
However, the EU negotiations requirements were highly demanding and meeting all the
benchmarks for opening and closing the chapters naturally took precedence. Moreover, high
pressure and constrained timetables related to the absorption of EU funds, which are mostly
grants, often consumed the capacity of Croatia's public administration, affecting the
implementation of Bank-financed projects. With respect to the reforms, a slow pace
continued throughout the CPS period in spite of the urgency, though this was to an extent
mitigated by the EC's monitoring of Croatia's reform efforts and the Government's fiscal
consolidation plans.
Implementation
28.
IBRD portfolio has been gradually decreasing towards a more focused and
selective program. The portfolio was at its peak in 2009 with commitments of $1.2 billion
for 19 projects. Upon accession, about EUR 1.9 billion per year, mostly grants, will become
available to Croatia in 2014-20 period, through EU Funds. This prompted the Bank and the
Government at CPS mid-term to become more selective with traditional IBRD financing.
Current commitments of about $900 million are expected to be further downsized over the
next two years.
29.
Progress in project implementation has been uneven and this was addressed
through project restructuring and regular annual portfolio reviews. Overall, about half
of the projects in the portfolio have been performing in a satisfactory manner and several
projects have faced mild to serious problems. In recent years, four projects closed with
unsatisfactory outcomes, and one more was assessed as unsatisfactory by IEG. Annual joint
portfolio reviews (JPR) revealed that projects experienced problems due to poor project
readiness and insufficient capacity at start up, ending up with very low disbursement over the
46

first two years. The Ministry of Finance has taken on a stronger coordinating role in
identifying and resolving the bottlenecks, through the JPR process. Following an in-depth
review in 2009, restructuring became essential to returning the projects on track and at times
involved partial cancellation and changes to project development objectives. In recent years,
the Bank and the Government applied more rigorous implementation readiness criteria for
new Bank-funded projects, including ensuring that monitoring and evaluation frameworks are
in place. Taking advantage of project preparation facilities also improved the portfolio
performance. The upcoming 2013 JPR will address the portfolio performance strategically,
focusing on problem projects, with a view to informing the design and the program of the
new CPS.
30.
As a result of the mid-term review, the Bank adjusted the lending program by
adding three new loans and several advisory activities to the program. The Integrated
Land Administration System Project (approved in FY12) supports further modernization of
the land administration and the spatial data infrastructure in line with the EU's INSPIRE
Directive. Additional Financing for the Trade and Transport Integration project (approved
FY12) focused on improving the port competitiveness along the EU corridors. This project
has a regional relevance as the port of Ploce is equally important in serving Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and indirectly other countries in the region. A third project, follow up to the
Science and Technology project will support Croatia's R&D institutions to prepare for the
use of EU Structural Funds. The analytical work after the mid-term focused on selected
policy areas that await Croatia post-accession and priority economic challenges. Croatia
Policy Notes: A Strategy for Smart, Sustainable and Inclusive Growth facilitated the
engagement with the new Government and envisaged three directions consistent with the
policy program of the new Government, notably: fiscal consolidation, structural reforms and
maximizing the benefits of EU membership. The Policy Notes were a useful instrument to
connect with the Government that came into office in late December 2011, and confirm the
continuation of the ongoing and planned program.
31.
In the last year of CPS implementation, the program started to gradually
transition from a project to knowledge based partnership. This should further align Bank
activities with the EU policy agenda and increase synergies, while facilitating the
management of a smaller Bank portfolio. Besides the proposed Second Science and
Technology Project and a guarantee operation with HBOR, the Bank and the Government are
preparing the Second Economic Recovery Development Policy Loan. Public Finance
Review, Railways Policy Note, EU Preparedness Technical Assistance, and Higher
Education Technical Assistance, which are currently in progress, are at the core of this
knowledge-based partnership. They focus on major post-accession challenges Croatia will
face, from improving its access to markets and competitiveness, through expenditure
rationalization, to increasing the opportunity to efficiently absorb a new major source of
financing, the EU Structural Funds. For instance, the Railways Policy Note helped inform the
restructuring plans of railway companies. As the transition proceeds, it will be important to
integrate the monitoring and evaluation of the knowledge products, in addition to lending.
The annual reviews that are jointly led by the Ministry of Finance and the Bank could be a
suitable instrument and an opportunity to establish regular monitoring of the future CPS
outcomes with Government.

47

Key Lessons for the New CPS
32.
CPS program alignment with the EU accession objectives was critical for
achieving envisaged program objectives and initiating the country's reform program.
High relevance of the CPS program, designed around Croatia's EU goals, is reflected in good
achievement of CPS objectives that directly helped fulfill the country's EU benchmarks and
negotiations requirements. On the economic front, the EC's annual Progress Reports and the
Pre-Accession Economic Program (PEP) helped Croatia formulate and monitor the progress
towards accession. Therefore, designing the policy lending as integral part of the PEP, and
aligning the core CPS outcomes for macro-stability around the same objectives, was an
appropriate approach.
33.
Overall, CPS design was adequately flexible, which helped mitigate somewhat
the ambitious CPS objectives. A flexible structure allowing timely modifications, for
instance with the outbreak of the crisis, should be continued and even scaled up in Croatia's
evolving EU context. Equally, the Bank should be realistic in assessing the objectives that it
can influence. For instance, the Bank has acknowledged that fiscal consolidation is a
medium-term process and the policy actions supported by the DPLs, with clear indicators and
targets, are a small step in the process, which is likely to take several years. This lesson was
applied during the CPS, with adequate shift made to a programmatic support through the
ERDPL, which also supported the Government's economic recovery program (ERP) in the
context of the global crisis. The Government and the Bank are recognizing the challenges for
achieving the fiscal consolidation efforts over the medium-term, and the Bank is likely to stay
engaged in support of these efforts.
34.
Monitoring and evaluation of specific CPS objectives, rather than deliverables,
would be beneficial in evaluating the program's contribution to country objectives. The
CPS did not envisage a specific mechanism for monitoring the progress of achieving the
program's objectives. This is regrettable especially in light of the Government's mandatory
annual review of portfolio financed from International Financial Institutions, which could
have been used as a platform to assess the progress of CPS objectives. While the Bank and
the Government were tirelessly applying the EU agenda criteria whenever reviewing the
options of new engagement and instruments, this has not been applied to specific CPS
objectives. Hence, the mid-term review of the CPS remained the only tool to verify the
progress in achieving the objectives and reviewing its relevance to country goals.
35.
Pressures on time and demand for intensive EU negotiations process and
requirements were heavy, absorbing the public administration resources. Public
administration's capacity to prepare and implement projects remains vulnerable, as reflected
in implementation constraints that the portfolio experienced throughout the CPS period. The
projects closely linked to achieving the EU agenda displayed highest ownership, albeit they
also experienced difficulties in implementation. With Croatia's upcoming opportunity for the
use of major EU post-accession funds, the pressures on the administration to absorb these
funds efficiently will be naturally increasing. Therefore, the Bank initiated a shift in its
program at the time of the CPS mid-term to focus its support on improving capacity for the
management of future EU funds.
36.
The EU focus as key criterion for engagement should be complemented by
increased selectivity in intervention areas, and building on existing engagement, where
appropriate. The pressures on administration and absorption of EU funds also imply more

48

selectivity with respect to traditional Bank financing instruments and more selective program
objectives. While constant alignment with the evolving EU agenda has been endorsed, the
impact of Bank-funded activities is usually more significant in the areas where continuous
engagement has been ongoing. Follow up projects and additional financing not only entail
that implementation setup is in place, but also that trust is established as a prerequisite for
successful cooperation.
37.
There is a close correlation between project performance and project
implementation readiness. Several projects experienced chronic implementation delays due
to poor preparation, resulting in multiple extensions of closing dates and delayed
achievement of project objectives. Applying stricter implementation readiness criteria and
using project preparation advances (PPAs) have proven useful to avoid this. In general, the
PPAs have been very well absorbed, helped familiarize the implementing bodies with World
Bank policies and procedures and improved project ownership. One of the tools for spotting
the problems early on is using the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems properly. Many
projects were approved without adequate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, with
inappropriate indicators or missing baselines long into the mid-term of project
implementation. The quality of M&E systems should be assessed as a rule as part of project
readiness, otherwise the assessment of project progress and final evaluation of objectives are
compromised.
38.
Another systemic issue that adversely affected the portfolio performance is
related to implementation of information systems. Several projects experienced problems
with information systems, which use ICT solutions for developing country-wide systems such
as tax system, land registry system and judicial case management system. Such systems are
increasingly used to support many different business processes or functionalities, including
governance issues; however, their complexity is often underestimated both by the borrower
and the Bank teams. Inadequate preparation and involvement of relevant experts and
stakeholders early in the design stage are part of the problem, whereas the real difficulties
start already with contract implementation. In most cases, the users lack the capacity to
supervise implementation adequately, which results in delays, increasing the costs and
functional shortcomings. To prevent this, assessing the users' capacity to absorb, maintain
and manage such systems is needed at the project preparation stage, with its design and
preparation of procurement taking place in the first year of project implementation at the
latest.

49

Attachment 1. Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation
Country
Develop.
Goal

Status of CPS Outcomes and
St
ato
Sumes
Evaluation Summary

CPS Outcomes

Lending
lending
and Non-lending Activities

and

Lessons for the new CPS

I. Sustaining Macro-Stability
Enhancing the
efficiency and

*

Further fiscal
consolidation as per

* ACHIEVED - Fiscal consolidation efforts were supported

the Government's
program to contain
general government
deficit from 2.5
percent of GDP in
2008 and its peak of
5.8 percent of GDP in
2011 to below 5
percent of GDP in
2012.17

fall during the global crisis led the deficit to surge to over 5.0
percent of GDP in 2010 (from 2.6 percent in 2007), and
2011. In 2012, the new Government reversed the trend and
general government deficit stood at preliminary 3.8
percent of GDP in 2012, thus achieving the revised CPS
target. This is due to increased revenues as a result of
improved tax compliance and VAT increase, and some
reductions in subsidies, maintenance and capital spending.
The 2013-15 budget projects a slower trend, setting the
deficit at 4.1 percent of GDP for 2013 and 3.0 percent for
2015.
Progress made in improving enabling environment with f
adoption of Fiscal Responsibility Act aimed at reducing
spending, supported through Fiscal Responsibility
Framework Policy Note. ERDPL 2 supports amendments to
the law to strengthen the role of the Fiscal Board (under
way).
g
9 Arrears were reduced by 0.3 percent of GDP from 1.1
percent in 2007 to 0.8 percent in 2010 and 0.6 percent in

effectiveness

of public
finances

continuously through PAL2, SFS DPL and ERDPL. Revenue

Lending - Ongoing
0
Revenue Administration
Modernization Project
(FY07); ISR: MU/MU
Lending - Closed
*
PAL2 (FY07-09); ICR: MS
Fiscal, Social & Financial
*
Sector DPL (FY10); ICR: S
*
Economic Recovery DPL
(FY11); ISR: S/S
AAA
Public Administration
Reform Support TA (FY09)
*
Institutional Framework &
Fiscal Risk Assessment for
PPP (FY10)
Fiscal Responsibility
Framework (FY 11)

0

2011.

17

Improved tax

ACHIEVED
i

compliance rate from

at 89 percent in 2011, as supported through RAMP,

84 percent in 2007 to
87 percent in 2011.

including additional indicators:
E-taxation increased oto 52% in 2012 (target was 20 percent)
since introduction in 2007 (from 7.7 percent in 20 10).
Tax arrears reduced by 22% from HRK 31.8 billion in 2006
to HRK24.65 billion in 2012.
tRAMP facilitated institutional reorganization of Tax

-

Fiscal consolidation is a
medium-term process and the
policy actions supported by
DPLs, with clear indicators
and targets, are a small step
in the process, which is likely
to take several years. Hence,
a flexible CPS adequately
shifted to a programmatic
support through the ERDPL,
which also supported the
government's economic
recovery program (ERP) in
the context of the global
csis.

Croatia Policy Notes: A
Strategy for Smart,
Sustainable and Inclusive
Growth (FY 2)

Target for tax compliance rate achieved,
*

Justice Sector Public
Expenditure and
Institutional Review (FY3)

Regional AAA
Performance-Based

18 ISR

revised at mid-term review;
*utcome
original wording: "...to reduce general government deficit from 2.3 percent of GDP towards balanced budget by 2010-11"
(Implementation Status and Results) ratings first indicate DO (Development Objective) rating, then IP (Implementation Progress) rating. Rating indications:

MS

Moderately Satisfactory, S - Satisfactory, MU

-

-

Moderately Unsatisfactory.
50

Administration and in October 2012, Croatia established the
Large Taxpayers Office (LTO) as a separate unit, through
amendments to the Tax Administration Law. Large taxpayers
represent a major share in the overall tax revenue, i.e. some
600 entities covering about 46% of taxes and contributions.
Developing specific protocols, programs and initiatives for
monitoring the tax compliance of large taxpayers (to be
defined through secondary legislation based on specific
sectors and the annual gross turnover), will result in
improved efficiency of the tax administration, strengthened
compliance risk management system and increased
compliance rate.
* Organizational changes were made to the Central Office of
CTA, 20 regional offices and 122 local branches including
simplification of administration of tax system and
harmonization of procedures. This resulted in the increase of
tax revenue and social contributions by 4.1 % in the first
eight months of 2012 (compared to same period of 2011),
reverting a declining trend that started in 2008. New
regulations introduced tax audit procedures to supervise cash
transactions and putting in place the plans to implement the
exchange of information between tax administration and
other public services for tax purposes.
*

Strengthen
financial
sector
supervision

*

Programming
budgeting improved
and performance
budgeting piloted.
Strengthened
regulatory/supervisory
framework for banks
and non-banks with
improved financial
stability

Improving
effectiveness
of public
sector
governance
and judiciary

*

Government
effectiveness
improved as measured
by World Bank
Governance Indicators
from 70 percent in

Budgeting (FY10)
Economic Report

*Regular

* ACHIEVED - 2008 Organic Budget Law introduced

medium-term performance budgeting - now in
implementation for the third year, supported through
Performance-Based Budgeting AAA.
* ACHIEVED - FSAP recommendations: all addressed
under the Fiscal, Social and Financial Sector DPL.
Supervisory frameworks for banking and non-banking
institutions aligned with Basel II through implementation of
Credit Institutions Act, Capital Market Act and Consumer
Credits Act.
* Corporate governance codes: mandatory for all listed
companies introduced through the Capital Market Act.
H. Strengthening Private Sector Led-Growth and Accelerating EU Convergence
* NOT ACHIEVED - Public administration reform: Slow
Lending - Ongoing
progress with slight increase of World Bank Governance
*
Revenue Administration
index to 71.4 in 2008, after which it declined to 69.2 in 2011
Modernization Project
as a result of lack of reforms in investment climate and
(FY07); ISR: MU/MU
*
Trade and Transport
policy reversal related to depoliticization.
Integration Project (FY07);

PAL has been grounded in
analytical work that set forth
the agenda for growth and
EU accession. This was
continued during CPS
implementation with a

51

and reducing
corruption

2006 to over 72
percent in 2011.19
*

ISR: MS/S
Rijeka Gateway Project 11

number of policy notes - on
pension, labor, social and

(FY09); ISR: MU/MU

other emerging issues

Export Finance

helped inform the policy

-

and

Civil service

NOT ACHIEVED

depoliticized.

supported under PAL2, as following 2007 elections, civil

Intermediation Loan Project

lending.

service was depoliticized to the level of directors (former
assistant ministers), which were appointed based on

(FY10; Additional
Financing FY13); ISR: t/h

Equally, the EU Convergence

Justice Sector Support
Project (FY10); ISR:

report provided diagnostics
and options for accelerating

-

This target was initially achieved and

competitive selection process. The objective of this reform
was to nurture a competent and professional civil service at

*

*

the policy making level and ensure that expertise standards

Improvement in the
efficiency ofjudiciary
evidenced by
independently
verifiable performance

indicators, including a
steady reduction in
court case backlogs,

MS/MS

the convergence of Croatia

are maintained over political cycles. New Government
changed the organizational hierarchy whereby. directors
became sector heads, while the position of assistant ministers
as political appointees was reinstated. The positions of

*

Integrated Land
Administration System
Project (FY12); ISR:
MS/MS

with EU economies - as a
backbone of the CPS designed to support country's
EU accession agenda as a

secretary general in ministries and deputy director of smaller
state administrative organizations remained civil servant
positions.
* Under way. Strengthening the human resources management
system is in progress, as part of ERDPL the Government
established the central payroll and HR registry, which
enhances the transparency and efficiency of the payroll
system and management of budgetary resources, while
planned introduction of performance-based remuneration

*

Second Science and
Technology Project / Project
Preparation Advance
(approved in FY12)

cross-cuffing theme.

Lending - Closed
Real Property Registration
and Cadastre Project (FY0310); 1CR: S

*

system through the new Law on Civil Service Salaries is

*

Science and Technology

delayed. The Government is currently harmonizing the salary
system across all administrative bodies in public
administration.

*

Project (FYO6-1 1); ICR: S
PAL2 (FY07-09); ICR: MS
Fiscal, Social & Financial

* ACHIEVED - Key indicators ofjudicial performance -

*

*eeconont

Rce

DPL

the of JSSP - show steady
systemthroug
nw with support
established and tracked
whi cheain
improvement. As of 2012, improvements are registered
reducing the processing time in pilot courts and improving
efficiency in Zagreb State Attorney's Office where an

S/S
(FY11);tiSR:
CinveSrgenceSalaiesri
*awUn

automated case tracking system is in place, supported under

AAA

JSSP. Overall Croatia made significant progress inerati
increasing the efficiency ofjudiciary, which enabled the
completion of EU accession talks in 2011.p
* Court case backlog: Case backlog reduced by 23 percent
between 2006 and 2009 to 800,000 cases,
JSSsupported
-sosta under
PAL2, RPRCP and JSSP. Approximately 40ro of reduction

Rij

Poe
ICR: MU;

*aIntittioalraamworoan

(FY10)
Fiscal Risk Assessment for

' 90utcome revised. Original wording: "...from 70 percent in 2006 to over 75 percent in 2011."

52

Improve the
investment
climate and

decreasing
ofte
informality

*

Increased private
sector share in GDP
towards 80 percent

rvaiato o he
through continued

in case backlog is in Zagreb that accounts for the largest
share of backlog. By 2010, RPRCP helped reduce the
backlog in land registry, which was part of the aggregate
backlog, by 80 percent. Case backlog for 7420 courts,
monitored under JSSP, continues to decrease and went down
from 384,038 in 2009 to 369,090 in September 2012. This is
an important commitment arising from EU accession
negotiations and this trend is recognized in the EC's October
2012 Monitoring Report, indicating that in the first semester
2012 the backlog of criminal cases continued to fall by 12
percent, while the March 2013 report affirmed that during
2012 the courts overall managed to resolve more cases than
the influx.
* Integrated Case Management System (ICMS), an
information analytical system supported through JSSP,
provides data on performance of the judicial system and
enables the management of resources as to resolve the
backlog and income workload. JSSP supports the upgrade of
ICMS, while its roll out in remaining 33 municipalities is
supported through EU-financed projects. The upgrade takes
into account the ongoing court network consolidation and
changes in court practices and procedures as to reflect key
business process changes.
PARTIALLY ACHIEVED - Private Sector Share of
GDP: increased from 60% in 2006 to 70 percent of GDP in
2011.237 companies were either sold or liquidated (August

20

CPF portfolio and
accelerated removal of
regulatory obstacles
and reduction of cost
of doing business.

*

*

.
*

*

Labor Market Issues in
Croatia (FY11)
Doing Business follow-up
(FY11)
Enhancing Corporate
Financial Reporting IDF
(FYO7-1 1); Completion: S
MiFID Assessment (FY11)
EU & Croatian Bank
Resolution Regimes (FY11)
Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy (FY12)
Croatia Policy Notes: A
Strategy for Smart,
Sustainable and Inclusive
Growth (FY12)
Justice Sector Public

*

Enditu
Re
and
Instittia
Rve
Fy 13)
JCotia ase Stu
on
Je
a Atou
n
Public Finance Review

*

(FY13)
Railways Policy Note

icrae
share in GDPfirhrn203aste-dvlpduerheRl
rvaesector
2012) under the ERDPL, and the progress is on track to

of the

economy

*

owned shipyards got privatized, while a postal bank and an
insurance company are to be privatized (in progress).
* 2013 Cost of Doing Business: Croatia ranked 84 among 185
countries in 2012, 4 places down compared to 2011.
* Under the ERDPL2, the authorities have ectorrs
simplified business
registration and reduced its cost, while enforcement over the
cash assets was made more efficient. Further legislation
changes are inprocess to abolish location permit and create
e-construction permit. Under ILAS, continuous reduction of
transaction processing time in land registry and cadastre
offices, and reduction of cadastre and land registry backlog
contributing to reduced cost of doing business. In spite of the

(FY13)
Rgoa
A
Regia AAA

LeJusie Seto P
s
Leaing(FY11)
Ci
in
thog th
(fY1
Porm o Accuting
Strengthening (REPARIS)
(FY09-12)

ILAS has inherited
difficulties with a particular
information system (Joint

ifrainsse

fln

eg and
tre),
r
Property Registration and
Cadastre Project, which
delayed the main project
component by more than a
year. Complexity of building
information systems through
ICT solutions are undermined
and insufficient attention is
paid to capacity assessments
of beneficiaries and
stakeholders to carry out the

74 courts monitored include 13 commercial, 40 municipal and 21 county courts.

53

good progress in reducing the cost of doing business under
both projects, these reforms still remain fragmented and need
to be reinforced by increasing the predictability and
transparency of procedures and regulation, as well as rule of
law.
* Tax compliance cost: stands at 0.2% of total taxpayers'
revenues in 2010 (baseline).

Align
provision of
infrastructure

*

significant private
sector investment.

services with
ith21
servces
demand

Enhancing
technology
adoption and
innovation

Increased capacity of
the Port of Rijeka and
Port of Ploce with

*

Commercialization of
public research results
promoted, more
private sector

procurement and contract
management, and then absorb
and maintain the systems. In
addition, remuneration
system in public
administration is not
attractive enough to retain
highly skilled staff, which is
needed for management of
such systems.

* PARTIALLY ACHIEVED - Under two Rijeka Gateway

Projects, Rijeka Container Terminals: physical expansion
under way under Brajdica Container Terminal will increase
the capacity for container traffic from currently 150,000 TEU
to 300,000 TEU by June 2013. A five-year contract for a
scaled up Zagreb Container terminal has been signed in April
2012, following a complex design and build procurement
process, which took more than two years, thus significantly
delaying the start of construction works.
* Ploce Container Terminal opened for operation in 2011
with initial capacity of 66,000 TEU, supported under TTI.
The port capacity will further increase with the construction
of Bulk Cargo Terminal that started in April 2012, and will
accommodate for 4.6 million tons in capacity and for up to
180,000 dwt. Target is not fully achieved because of
implementation delays related to prolonged procurement,
including preparation of technical documentation and
delayed issuing of permits.
* Port Concession agreements: Extension of Rijeka's
Brajdica Container Terminal is underway with majority
ownership transferred to international private operator
against $38 million of private capital, resulting in increased
productivity. Two concession agreements signed for new
terminals in Ploce in 2010; all concessions on cost recovery
basis.
* PARTIALLY ACHIEVED - In 2006, the Government
adopted two strategic documents to support the R&D agenda
- "Science and Technology Policy 2006-2010" and the
"Action Plan for increasing the level of investment in

Mainstreaming innovation
policies into major R&D
expenditure programs
requires a programmatic

Outcome revised. Original wording: "Increased capacity of the Port of Rijeka and Ploce with revenues increasing from $80 million in 2007 to $115
million in
2012 by addressing critical port capacity constraints, with significant private sector investment."
21

54

innovation generated
and increased share of
R&D spending by
private sector from
current one-third of
total towards the
Lisbon agenda target
of two-thirds. 2 2

*

Research and
Development spending
as a share of GDP
increases to 1.1
percent by 2012.23

Research and Development", under STP. The R&D funding
for SMEs, research organizations and collaborative projects
between academia and industry was aimed at promoting the
transfer of research results and technology to the business.
The targets of commercialization of public research
(patenting, licensing, research contracts and spillovers) were
exceeded and more private sector innovation achieved: 69
contracts between R&D institutions and industry (2011) from
2 in 2006 (target of 30); 59 license agreements, spillovers
and patents cumulative (2011) from none in 2006 (target of
30); E13M private R&D mobilized for innovation projects
(2011) from E6M in 2006; between 2006 and 2008, the
share of Croatian SMEs with new or improved products
(EU Community Innovation Survey) increased from 7.2
to 10.8 percent.
* Private sector R&D spending went from 27 percent in 2006
(Eurostat) to 32 percent in 2010. Under STP, BICRO R&D
programs directly supported 89 SMEs, for projects of over
638 million, of which 30 to 50 percent provided by SMEs.
STP also helped mitigate the effect of the crisis that hit
Croatia in 2009 and reallocated more funds towards
innovative SMEs.
* NOT ACHIEVED - R&D spending as a share of GDP

remains 0.8 percent due to fiscal consolidation efforts. STP
helped create the initial policy basis; however the financial
crisis diminished this effect. Access to EU Structural Funds
could mitigate this and Croatia prepares applications for
R&D grants schemes for 2014-20 allocations, estimated at
Eml50/year for R&D (40 percent of Croatia's R&D
spending) - this work is supported through Project
Preparation Advance for proposed STP II.

approach and policy
dialogue, which was
attempted through ERDPL.
However, the Government
efforts have not been
successful in carrying major
reforms.
At mid-term review, the
Bank added a very ambitious
CPS outcome on the increase
of R&D spending as a share
of GDP. This decision was
based on the envisaged STP
repeater project (in FY12)
and ERDPL 2 measures for
innovation programs, though
from a distance it could be
argued that this is more a
country level goal. However,
the preparation of both
projects slowed down with
the elections and change in
administration. This and the
effects of the prolonged crisis
have made it impossible for
the operation to contribute to
the CPS outcome.

111: Improving Quality and Efficiency in Social Sectors

Outcome revised. Original wording: "Applied research promoted and increased share of R&D spending by private sector from current one-third of total towards
the Lisbon agenda target of two-thirds."
23 Outcome added at mid-term review.
22

55

Increasing
sustainability
and equity of
the pension
system

*

Making the
health
system more
efficient and
improving
health
outcomes

*

Administrative cost of
pension funds reduced,

*

Improved efficiency of
health spending and
effectiveness of the
Emergency Medical
Services (EMS)
system.

ACHIEVED - Exempt population reduced by 36 percent
between 2009 and 2011 and co-payment exemptions
streamlined through legislation. Hospital network
rationalization carried out in Zagreb. Central procurement
for hospitals and e-health services introduced under the
ERDPL. From 2005 to 2010, the shares of pharmaceuticals
in HZZO's mandatory insurance-related care expenditures
each decreased from 21 to 19 percent though the number of
prescriptions increased by 69.3 percent. This improved
efficiency is the result of two new ordinances that have
regulated the market since 2009, and were supported under
ERDPL. The first ordinance put in place a mechanism for
setting a maximum wholesale price based on international
price comparisons, specifically prices in Italy, France, and
Slovenia. The second ordinance defined the criteria for
including medicines in the HZZO's basic and
supplementary reimbursement drug lists, based on medical
evidence and cost-benefit analysis.
* Improved effectiveness of EMS through an overhaul of
EMS system including separation of pre-hospital EMS from
primary health care, new national EMS system
management, standardized dispatchers protocols, and
massive training of staff in EMS system, under DEMSIPP with response time for EMS interventions at the scene
reduced from 17 to 12 minutes in 2012; emergency field
calls as percentage of total field calls increased from 9.7
percent in 2005 to 100 percent in 2011 as the nonemergency workload moved to other areas of health
system; improved coverage of EMS across Croatia due to
redistribution of teams from earlier uneven coverage,

ACHIEVED - Supported by the ERDPL, privileged
pensions were reduced by 20 percent, privileged pensions
for government officials abolished and rationalized for
military employees. Early retirement decrement doubled
except for beneficiaries with more than 40 years of service.
* Administrative costs of second pillar reduced in 2010 and
2011 through a reduction of mandatory pension funds' asset
management fee from 0.75 percent to 0.65 percent and
further to 0.45 percent, while in 2011 the Government
imposed a flat account management fee for REGOS onto
pension fund management companies.

Lending - Ongoing
Revenue Administration
Modernization Project
(FY07); ISR: MU/MU
*
Development of Emergency
Medical Services &
Investment Planning Project
(DEMSIPP) (FY09); ISR:
S/S
Lending - Closed
*
Pension System Investment
*

Project (FYO3-09); ICR:
*

reflected in reduction of variation of EMS teams per capita

*

*

*

MS
Social Welfare
Development Project
(FYO5-1 1); ICR: 5; lEG:
MU
Fiscal, Social & Financial
Sector DPL (FY10); ICR: S
Education Sector
Development Project
(FY06-12); ICR: MU
Economic Recovery DPL
Modmiztio
Projectinsit
(FY11); ISR: /

AAA
*
Financing, Providing &
Regulating Long-term care
for the Elderly (FY11)
*
Pension Reform Options
(FY11)
.
Poverty Assessment Update

*

(FY11)
Strategy for Smart,
Sustainable and Inclusive
Growth (FY12)
Public Finance Review

Regonl A
*

a

Ln-emCr(F1)

The Bank's engagement in
the health sector through
various instruments, DPLs,
investment lending and
advisory activities, was a
favorable context for a
reform-oriented program of
the new Government. The
team in the line ministry is
determined to increase the
sector's efficiency with a
significant impact on cost
control, through
implementation of the
hospital rationalization plan,
outsourcing of some nonmedical services, expanding
the health technology
assessment and introducing,
for medical devices,
regulations similar to those
designed for pharmaceuticals.
Regory hanesuand
setting up new management
institutions at central and
local levels will likely take
time that needs to be counted

in - as they often involve
56

by regions by 20 percent in 2011.

stakeholders, as it was the

case in rolling the EMS
system under DEMSIPP.
Enhancing
educational
system to
better
respond to
needs of
knowledgebased
society

*

Improved student
learning and system
performance with
performance of
Croatian pupils at
PISA 2009 stable or
improved compared to
EU average.

PARTIALLY ACHIEVED - Improved student learning
not fully achieved due to decreased scores of 2009 PISA in
math (467 to 460), reading (477 to 476) and science (493 to
486). However, matura, a school exit exam, saw the scores
improving between 2010 and 2011 in math (from 50.8 to
55.l1o) and Croatian language (from 70.7 to 71.7%) despite
of increase of exam-passing thresholds by 5-8 percent, as
supported under Education Sector Development Project.
* Pre-school and secondary school enrollment rates:
increased from 43 and 79.2 percent respectively in 2005 to
55.6 (falling short of revised target of 58) and 81.4 in 2011
(exceeded). Primary school gross enrollment rates decreased
from 96.5 to 91.9 percent (2011).

ESDP provides lessons
related to results framework projects should avoid
combination of objectives
when one is dependent on the
completion of the other, and
indicators with infrequent
data are not suitable to signal
problems, and may pose
problems with credibility due
to a small sample/short trend
(two PISA tests, two exit
exams).

* Number of students in triple shift primary schools
reduced from 9 percent in 2006 to below 2 percent in 2010
(exceeded the target of 7n) while number of students in
primary and secondary single-shift schools increased from
12 and 18 percent in2006 to 48 and 35 percent in 20
(exceeded), under ESDP.
System performance substantially improved with support
of ESDP, with new national curriculum framework for preschool, primary and secondary education developed and

The SWAp design and
annual development
programs allowed the line
Ministry to be in charge of
the reform program and
helped develop its capacity to
prepare and implement the
yearly plans, carrying out

approved; establishment of national center for external

yearly evaluations, and

evaluation and successful introduction of matura for all
gymnasium and VET students wanting to enroll in tertiary
education, introduction of integrated information system and
new management and leadership training for school
principals, as well as reduction in VET programs from 300
(2005) to 197 (2010), slightly below target of 190.

defining resource allocation
based on progress towards
plans. The implementing
agencies have developed
stronger capacity to pursue
their objectives, based on
experience they and their

staff gained first-hand during
Improving
social
inclusion

*

targetng ofprovision
socgti
of
assistance

Improved efficiency
and transparency of
social programs.

* PARTIALLY ACHIEVED - New social policy planning
methodology: under SWDP, developed and implemented in
10 of 21 counties, including multi-year master plans for the
of inclusive, qualitative and cost-effective services
based on need and demand. By involving the county centers
of social welfare, this planning tool attracts new and
innovative providers to deliver those services more
efficiently and effectively,

implementation.
Developing complex
information systems over a
standard project lifetime is
challenging - in SWDP it
involved prior policy
changes, stakeholders'
consultations, problems with
design and procurement, with
time-intensive and uncertain
57

* Management Information System (MIS) software for
social welfare, developed under SWDP, was initially piloted
in three counties and then withdrawn. The new Government
has adjusted and upgraded the MIS and it is currently used in
all 12 social welfare centers in Zagreb, with a plan to roll out
the system countrywide starting in June 2013. Data exchange
between Zagreb social welfare centers and Tax
Administration is fully in place.
* Social workers' time spent on direct work with clients
significantly increased, from 30 percent in 2005 to 65
percent in 2007 (survey) as a result of the introduction of
one-stop-office work model in centers for social welfare,
supported through SWDP.
* Deinstitutionalization: despite decrease in number of
persons in state-owned residential institutions, total number
of persons in residential institutions declined only slightly
from 25,543 in 2007 to 25,523 in 2009 due to increase in
private residential care.
* Social Welfare Reform Strategy 2011-2016 and the Social
Welfare Law were enacted in 2011, supported by ERDPL,
aimed to reduce social exclusion and improve efficiency of
the system, including through better targeting of benefits.
The law linked the Guaranteed Minimum Income to the
poverty line as calculated by the Bureau of Statistics, so that
the eligibility threshold of relative poverty is indexed and
functions as automatic stabilizer.
Strengthen
environmient
and nature
protection

*

Improved water supply
and wastewater services
and flood protection
measures in Croatia's
inland municipalities. 2 4

testing and fine-tuning.
Engagement under SWDP
and ERDPL led to policy
changes through new
legislation (more communitybased services, consolidation
of benefits), and
comprehensive interventions
in sectors require
combination of instruments.

IV. Increasing sustainability of Long-Term Development
ACHIEVED - Improved inland water and wastewater
Lending - Ongoing
services: Under IW, the infrastructure in water and
Inland Waters Project
wastewater services has been constructed and/or upgraded
(FY07); Last ISR before
through constructing of wastewater and water treatment
closing: S/S
*
Coastal Cities Pollution
plants, pumping stations, water reservoirs, and
supply/collection pipelines thus ensuring the main
Control Project 11 (FY09);
ISR: MS/MS
conditions for increasing the number of population
EU Natura 2000
*
receiving reliable water and wastewater services. The
Integration Project (FY11);
project closed in December 2012, and while a certain

Performance monitoring
indicators should be carefully
selected, in particular for
Adaptable Program Loans
(APL), monitoring the
program and project
objectives. In the case of
Coastal Cities Project, APL
allowed adjustments in the

portion of the population has already been connected to the

results framework and the

24 CPS originally envisaged one outcome for water and wastewater services, which was split at mid-term into two separate outcomes: (i) for inland municipalities
and (ii) for coastal cities. The original outcome was: "Improved coverage of water and wastewater services in 25 municipalities, contributing to the government's
plan to increase it from 75 percent and 44 percent respectively."

58

network, in some municipalities the secondary network
(that was not part of project financing) is still under way.
Once the secondary network is completed, the percent of
population in participating municipalities benefitting from
water supply will increase from 40 percent (2008) to 85
percent, and from wastewater services from 35 percent to
73 percent. Overall about 80,000 people are expected to be
connected to new or upgraded water and wastewater
services.
* To harmonize with EU environment requirements, Croatia
needs to invest some 3 billion in the environment sector.
The preparation of eight project applications for future EU
funds, supported under IW, will contribute to improving the
water supply and wastewater services.
* Flood Protection: Under IW project, retention volume for
flood protection
increased from 600M M in 2008 to 800M
33
m in May 2012, safeguarding the population and property
in Sava River Basin.
* Reducing water nutrient discharge - Per APCP April
2012 survey (785 farmers), 94 percent of farmers have
adopted at least one of preventive measures like organic
manure usage, proper manure storage, three year crop
rotation, or similar - thus contributing to reducing water
nutrient discharge - up from 35 percent of farmers in 2009.
Maintained quality of
Croatia's coastal waters
to meet applicable EU
and national standards
in participating
municipalities,

Increase in annual

ISR:

S/S

Lending-Closed
Coastal Cities Pollution
Control Project I (FY0410); 1CR: MS
*
Energy Efficiency Project
IBRD and GEF (FYO4-10);
ICR: MS
*
Social and Economic
Recovery Project (SERP)
(FYO5-1 1); 1CR: MS
*
Renewable Energy
Resources (RER) Project
GEF (FY05-10); ICR: MU
Agiutrlcqs
Cohesion Project IBRD,
Dutch TF (FYO6-13); Last
ISR: S/S
*
Agricultural Pollution
Control Project (APCP)
GEF (FYO8-13); Last ISR:
MS/S
*

project design for a
subsequent phase. However,
monitoring of the performance
of participating municipal
water and sewerage companies
have been significantly
delayed due to the lack of
capacity in the implementing
agency. Next CPS should
preempt M&E problems at the
project preparation stage.

AAA
* ACHIEVED - Quality of coastal waters participating

municipalities is maintained as indicated by percent of
samples (98 percent) from monitoring bathing and shellfish
areas complying with EU standard. Seawater quality
monitoring was established under CCPCP. Coastal water
pollution in the Adriatic Sea adjacent to the participating
cities was reduced, as indicated from the increase in the
percentage of wastewater produced in coastal municipalities
that is treated and disposed of in line with EU and Croatia
requirements from 6 percent to 45 percent. The number of
population in participating cities able to connect to a
wastewater collection system went from 56 to 68 percent,
meaning that in total 220,000 people directly benefited from
the project.
ACHIEVED

-

Annual capital and other investments across

*

*

Integrated Waste
Management Facility
(FY09)
Croatia Policy Notes: A
Strategy for Smart,
Sustainable and Inclusive
Growth (FY12)

Regional AAA
SE Europe Water &
Climate Adaptation (FY11)

*

59

capital and other
investment expenditure
across the parks estate 25

Improving
disaster risk
management
and
mitigation

*

Preparing
Croatia for
adapting to
and
mitigating
climate

change

Increased coverage in
precise weather event
now-forecasting (from
30 percent to 80 percent
of the territory) and
reduced response time to
disasters and
emergencies.
Increased irrigated area
for farming (increased
from 9000 ha).

the park estate increased by 9 percent from 2010 to 2011,
under EU Natura project. There are 15 infrastructure and
two research project proposals under preparation for
submission to the pipeline for EU Structural Funds for
programming period of 2014-20 in the value of EUR42
million - with one project already for financing
* DROPPED - This indicator was dropped since associated
project did not materialize.

DROPPED - This indicator was dropped since associated
project did not materialize,

Creating new regulatory and
institutional setting and
developing projects to operate
in this setting is too complex

Ilemented

ACHIEVED

framework with
incentives for provision

implemented under the RER project, inc. legislation and
EU compliant regulatory setting - new Energy Law,

wti

of renewable energy

secondary legislation for feed-in tariffs, RE Advisory

affected the achievement of

and scaled-up roll-out

Facility with RER Registry to help build pipeline and

objectives, i.e. developing RE

of programs for energy
efficiency.t

finance pre-feasibility studies, and RE grid integration.
Renewable energy projects for 79 MW capacity ready

proj ects.

(2013), of which 37 MW achieved financial closure - with
two projects constructed and one under construction; the
remainder of projects are on track to reach financial closure

The Recipient's ICR stressed
the importance of TA
provided for developing the

in 2013.

RE market framework and

-

Framework for RE incentives

9Under Energy Efficiency Project, HEP ESCO financed
energy efficiency investments totaled US$33.8 million in
Reducing

*

regional and

urban/rural
disparities

Established capacity to
develop a pipeline of
high quality regional
and municipal-level
development projects
including for donor

25

*

a standard investment

operation. Under RER project,
a delayed legislation adversely

resolving legal issues that led
to creation of a successful

December2011.

RER Registry.

ACHIEVED - 495 projects completed under SERP: 125
for social inclusion (target 120); 69 for small community
infrastructure (target was 60); and 211 in support of SMEs,
crafts and cooperatives (target was 240) benefitting 84,000

Proj ects involving demanddriven community-based
investments require substantial
time to build up, including
intensive work with various
groups of beneficiaries on

people residing in areas of special state concern; 1,359 new
jobs were created and Eli1 million in additional revenue was

Outcome revised. Original wording: "Improved conservation of biodiversity and management of natural resources, including an increase of protected areas from

11 percent to 15 percent of national territory."

60

financing in 13
counties.
Improved agriculture
productivity and further
alignment with the EU
acquis.

generated by the SMEs.
* PARTIALLY ACHIEVED - Alignment with EU's

agricultural acquis: EU October 2011 Progress Report
assessed that Croatia overall made good progress in
aligning its agriculture and rural development sector (EU
chapter 11) with the EU acquis, and implementing food
safety acquis transposition (chapter 12). Under AACP, the
capacity of the EU Paying Agency was developed, the land
parcel information system was built as part of the integrated
administration and control system, and the line ministry's
information management systems enhanced. The capacity
of the Croatian Food Agency was built and its staff trained
to apply EU acquis procedures. This has overall
strengthened the management and administration system for
implementation of the EU rural development programs.
* Agricultural productivity has many facets and because it
was not defined, it is difficult to assess its status, hence a
"partially achieved" rating for the overall outcome.
Establishment of the systems supported by AACP and
APCP played a major role in alignment with the EU acquis
and opening market opportunities for Croatian production,
the projects were not designed to significantly influence the
agricultural productivity.
* Integrated and upgraded cadastre and land registry
data in 6 percent of the country (target was 5 percent),
under RPRCP.

rising awareness and
familiarizing them with all
procedural requirements.
M&E systems should have
project-specific provisions
allowing testing the indicators
early on to ensure their
applicability. Clearly defined
Project development objective
(PDO) statement are needed to
ensure credible evaluation
defined (e.g. a concept of
social cohesion needs to be
specified in a given project
context and measured
adequately).
PDO that significantly
depends on externalities
(closing of EU chapter on
agriculture) poses risks of
delays that are beyond control
of the implementing body and
could be difficult, if not
impossible, to mitigate.

61

Attachment 2: Croatia - Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries FY2009 - 2013
FY
2009
Part I

CPS PLANS (September 30, 2008)
Project
Development of EMS and Investment Planning
Rijeka Gateway II

STATUS
US$(M)
27.0
130.0

Project
Actual
Actual

Coastal Cities Pollution Control I
Disaster Risk Management
Justice Sector Support Project

90.0
48.0
35.0

2010

Subtotal
Justice Sector Support Project

330
35.0

Part I

Climate Adaptation/irrigation

100.0

Dropped

Education II (or Additional Financing)

100.0

Dropped

US$(M)
28.3
122.5

Actual
Dropped
Forwarded to FY10
AdditionalActual Project:
GEF Coastal Cities Pollution

87.5

6.4

Subtotal
Actual

EU Natura 2000 Integration

30.0

Forwarded to FY11

Trade & Transport Integration (Additional Financing)

70.0

Forwarded to FY12

2009-10

Fiscal, Social and Financial DPL

Thd

Actual

Part II

Railway development
Energy generation or transmission

Thd
Thd

Dropped
Dropped
AdditionalActual Project:
Export Finance Intermediation Loan

Subtotal
2011

EU Natura 2000 Integration

297.0

335
30.0

Subtotal
Actual
AdditionalActual Project:

30.0
695.0

Subtotal
Subtotal FY2009-11

PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (September 19, 2011)
2012

141.2

474.5
28.8

Economic Recovery DPL
Subtotal
Subtotal FY2009-11

244.7
36.3

213.0
241.8
961.0

STATUS

Trade and Transport Integration (additional financing)

70.0

Actual

66.9

Integrated Land Administration System

24.0

Actual

23.8

Science and Technology II

29.0

Forwarded to FY13
No Additional Project

Subtotal
2013

Economic Recovery DPL II
Science & Technology II

123.0
195.0
29.0

Subtotal

90.7

Negotiated March 14, 2013; Board scheduled for April 26, 2013
AdditionalActual Project:

Export Finance Intermediation
Subtotal
Subtotal FY2012-13
TOTAL FY2009-13

224.0

Loan Additional Fin.

Subtotal

61.4
61.4

Subtotal FY2012-13
TOTAL ACTUAL DELIVERY FY2009-13

62

Attachment 3: Croatia - Non lending Services and Actual Deliveries (FY2009 - 2013)
CPS PLANS (September 30, 2008)
2009

2010

STATUS

Waste Management Facility in NW Croatia: private sector participation (PPIAF)

Actual

EU Convergence Report
IDF Grant: Enhancing Corporate Financial Reporting

Completed in FY10
Completed in FY11

Health / Social Services / Long Term Care
FSAP follow-up
Programmatic PER / Public Sector Policy Notes (FYO9-10)

Policy Note on Long Term Care for Elderly completed in FY11
Dropped
Various policy notes completed in FY10- 11
AdditionalProducts:
Public Administration Support TA

Brownfield Redeveloppment (FY10- 11)

Actual

Transport Sector Review/Climate (FY10-1 1)
Energy Sector Review (FYI 0-11)
Investment climate/competitiveness
CFAA/CPAR

Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped
AdditionalProducts:
Social Impact of the Crisis and Building Resilience
Institutional Framework and Fiscal Risk Assesment for PPP (PPIAF)

Public Sector Policy Notes: Fiscal Responsibility Framework

Actual

Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
2011

Policy Note on Labor Market Issues

Actual

Policy Note on Long Term Care for the Elderly
Policy Note on Pension Reform Options
Policy Note on Poverty Assesment Update

Actual
Actual
Completed in FY12

Doing Business Update

Actual

Science, Technology and Innovation Policy
Governance Assessment (Competitiveness) planned under Public Policy Notes

Completed in FY12
Dropped in FY13

Justice Sector Public Expenditure and Institutional Review

Forwarded to FY12

Croatia Case Study on Justice and Anticorruption Reforms

Forwarded to FY12
AdditionalProducts:
Assesment of Croatia's Markets in Financial Instruments Directive Impl.
Dutch EFO Justice Sector Support - Underway (Justice Sector Project)

STATUS - Completion Report April 2013

PROGRESS REPORT PLANS (September 19, 2011)
2012

2013

Croatia Policy Notes: A Strategy for Smart, Sustainable and Inclusive Growth

Actual

Public Finance Review

Forwarded to FY13

Higher Education TA

Underway (to be completed in FY13)

Railway Policy Note

Underway (to be completed in FY13)

EU Preparedness TA
Justice Sector Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
Croatia Case Study on Justice and Anticorruption Reforms
Public Finance Review

Underway (to be completed in FY13)
Underway (to be completed in FY13)
Underway (to be completed in FY13)
Underway

Higher Education TA

Underway

Railway Policy Note

Underway - Draft delivery to Government March 2013

EU Preparedness TA

Underway

Justice Sector Public Expenditure and Institutional Review

Underway

Croatia Case Study on Justice and Anticorruption Reforms

Underway

63

Annex 3: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date
4/4/2013
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

2010

2011

2012

2013

14
3.7
21.4
16.5
21.4
16.5
24.3

12
4.1
8.3
2.8
8.3
2.8
23.1

12
4.8
8.3
2.3
8.3
2.3
23.4

9
4.5
22.2
22.0
22.2
22.0
20.8

Number of Projects Under Implementation
a

Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) '

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item

Since FY 80

Last Five FYs

Proj Eval by OED by Number
34
12
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
1,927.3
796.4
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
29.4
33.3
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
19.1
20.9
a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
*

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

64

Annex 4: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 4/4/2013
Closed Projects

37

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
ofwhich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
ofwhich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
ofwhich has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (Active)

266.87
5.18
1,817.41
1,101.52
2,084.27
1,106.70

415.41

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

12.66

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

428.07
Difference Between

Active Projects

Expected and Actual

Last PSR

Project ID

PoetIPrjcNaeDevelopment
Project Name

Db

t

Disbursements

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Supervision Rating

Implementation
PImprt

Fiscal Year

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.
1.8915115

a

Frm
Rev'd

P104749

JUSTICE SECTOR SUPPORT (EFO)

MS

MS

2010

36.3

26.88528

P102732

COASTAL CITIES POLLUTION CTRL

MS

MS

2009

87.5

55.73296

26.251604

P102395

COSTAL CITIES POLL CTRL II (GEF)

MS

MS

2009

5.596294

4.4629605

P086669

EMS & INVEST PLANNING (DEMSIP)

S

S

2009

10.09953

10.564743

1.169293

P111205

EU NATURA 2000

S

S

2011

28.8

21.4533

9.0711398

5.705973

P116080

S

S

2010

202.63

68.64221

14.670267

28.78027

P122219

EXPORT FIL
INTEGRATED LAND ADMIN
SYSTEM

MS

MS

2012

23.8

P102778

REVENUE ADMIN MODERN (RAMP)

MU

MU

2007

68

P102365

RIJEKA Gateway ll (new FY09)

MU

MU

2009

P093767

TRADE & TRANS INTEG

MS

S

2007

Overall Result

6.4
28.3

14.04827

17.75431

0.3824642

22.34486

56.339007

122.5

114.8718

51.892641

142.22

77.62737

7.4544353

37.78777

421.0079

182.98077

109.8306

740.05

34

6.4

34

22.33901

65

Annex 5: Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio

Commitment
Yar
Fica

Institution
Short
Name

Loan

Equity

Cmtd IFC

Cmtd IFC

Amounts in US DollarMillions
Quasi Loan
+ Quasi
ALL
ALL
Equity
Cmtd Cmtd Cmd-IC
IFC
Part

QL + QE

LN

ET

Out IFC

Out IFC

u

F

ALL

ALL

Out IFC

Out Part

2013
2005
2012

Atlantic Trade
PBZ
RP Global

20.6
26.2
18.3

0
0
0

0
0
7.8

20.6
26.2
26.2

0
0
45.8

20.6
26.2
3.5

0
0
0

0
0
1.5

20.6
26.2
5.1

0
0
8.9

2013

SAME DTZ

15.7

0

0

15.7

0

15.7

0

0

15.7

0

2004/2005/2010/

Schwarz Group

45.8

0

0

45.8

26.2

6.5

0

0

6.5

0

126.6

0

7.8

134.4

71.9

72.6

0

1.5

74.1

8.9

2013
Total Portfolio

Zetelic

As ofjApril 30, 2013

66

|BRD 33394R1

CROATIA
This matp w

produced by

on this mp do not inply, on
the part of TheWorldBank
Group, any judgment on the

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

o

COUNTY (UPANIJA) CAPITALS



NATIONAL CAPITAL

--------

COUNTY (ZUPANIJA) BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

-

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

staton
teriory,
nr ony' endrsernent nr
ega

acceptance of
boundaries.

MAIN ROADS

o

Desoge Unie
Wo 8no.
wolors,denominations
and
nsho"
o
'"th-n"tio

RAILROADS

-

such

14E

15E

16E

18E

--- "17E

AUSTRIA

TO

7- 

To

MEMT
fMEDlMURSKA.
Kaps,a

r

r

HUNGARY

Vcfrazdin
KORVNICKOKRIZEVACKA

-VA AZDINSKA

To

Ljubjanaopivnica

KRAPINSKO-

SLOVENIA

Grad

To
Lubljana-

f


ISTA RSK

BJELOVARSKO
BILOGORSKA
Daruvar

K

A A

POSASKA

\Ra,6

Lo

UdbinaSEGos
Gracrc

44N

TO
ul

NSE-NK

ENJjSK

Za

T

TDbj

LCKOBiha

NoiSad
-A5N

Doboj

Otocac

b

k-tuana

ra

o

Sobor

Vinkv
UKVARSKO
SRIJEMSKA

rd

GORAN'SKA
Bihac

r

ukovr.

Slav

BRODSK-

SISACKO-MOSLACKA

PRIMORSKO-

"

POZESKO-SLVUNSKANc
P6zega

Nlina

N46'N

ob

OSJECKQBARANJSKA

VIROVITICKO
PODRVSKA

looe

Rieka

Porc

PecsE

RVirovitica

ZAGREBACKA GRAD
TO

Trieste

To

T

Beoer'P$T

ToGE0oa
~ubj.n.

.

c

Durd

ZARS

46N

TO
Tries.

9E

ZDRSA

Dugi

Knn

RBIA
BOSNIA AND
H ERZE GOVINA

To

Gao
Dinara

.

TouJs
oN

Karcol

4

N G O

Vdice

Lvn
U-i

SIBENSKO-

Adriatic

KNINSKA

T g
liSp|T.

Sea

20

ITALYYr20

40 Mil
Mostar

Ko-ula

.

Metkovic

Plo

43N

43N

eljesc

MONTENEGRO

DU/BROVACKOliit

SNERETVANSKA

.Trebine
Dubr

TO

-

n|

CROATIAt

0 20

0

42N
14E

15E'

16E

17E

4060

20

Kilometers

40 Miles
18E

19E
JULY2006

