Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 75263-TP

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORTATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE
FOR THE PERIOD FY2013-FY2017

Public Disclosure Authorized

February 19, 2013

Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea, and Pacific Islands Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region
The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Last Country Assistance Strategy: June 22, 2005 (Report No. 32700-TP)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
Currency Unit = US Dollar
Fiscal Year
(January 1 to December 31)
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
AF
APIP
ARP
ASTAE
BETF
BNPP
CAS
CASCR
CASPR
CGAP
CCI
CCSD
CEDAW
CPE
CPI
CPS
CSC
CSO
CSP
DfID
DHS
DSA
DTIS
EAP
EC
EDF
EDTL
EGRA
EITI
EMIS

Analytical and Advisory Work
Asian Development Bank
Additional Financing
Agriculture Productivity
Improvement Project
Agriculture Rehabilitation
Program
Asia Sustainable and Alternative
Energy Program
Bank-Executed Trust Fund
Bank-Netherlands Partnership
Program
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy
Completion Report
Country Assistance Strategy
Progress Report
Country Gender Action Plan
Chamber of Commerce and
Industry
Center for Conflict, Security and
Development
Convention to End All Forms of
Discrimination against Women
Country Program Evaluation
Consumer Price Index
Country Partnership Strategy
Civil Service Commission
Civil Society Organization
Consolidation Support Program
Department for International
Development
Demographic and Health Survey
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Diagnostic Trade Integration
Study
East Asia and the Pacific
European Commission
European Development Fund
Electricidade de Timor-Leste
Early Grade Reading Assessment
Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative
Education Management

ESDP
ESI
ESMAP
ESW
EU
FAO
FDI
FIRST
FM
FTI
GAFSP
GDP
GEF
GER
GNI
GoTL
HDI
HIES
HIV/AIDS

HMIS
IBRD
ICR
ICT
IDA
IDF
IEG
IFC
ILO
IMF
IMfTL

Information System
Energy Services Delivery Project
Estimated Sustainable Income
Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Reform and
Strengthening Initiative
Financial Management
Fast Track Initiative
Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross Enrollment Rate
Gross National Income
Government of Timor-Leste
Human Development Index
Household Income and
Expenditure Survey
Human Immunodeficiency
Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency
Syndrome
Health Management Information
System
International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development
Implementation Completion
Report
Information and Communication
Technology
International Development
Association
Institutional Development Fund
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
International Labour Organization
International Monetary Fund
Instituicao de Microfinancas de
Timor-Leste

IRI
ISF
ISN
J4P
JICA
LICUS
LNG
MAF
MDG
M&E
MIGA
MIS
MOE
MOF
MOH
MSS
MTEF
NESP
NGO
NHSSPSP
NLTA
NPs
ODA
OIG
PforR
PEFA
PER
PF
PFM
PFMCBP

International Roughness Index
International Stabilization Force
Interim Strategy Note
Justice for the Poor
Japan International Cooperation
Agency
Low Income Countries under
Stress
Liquefied Natural Gas
Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries
Millennium Development Goal
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
Management Information System
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Health
Ministry of Social Solidarity
Mid-Term Expenditure
Framework
National Education Strategy Plan
Non-Governmental Organization
National Health Sector Strategic
Plan Support Program
Non-Lending Technical Assistance
National Priorities
Official Development Assistance
Office of the Inspector General
Program for Results
Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability
Public Expenditure Review
Petroleum Fund
Planning and Financial
Management
Planning and Financial
Management Capacity Building
Program

PMO
PPP
PROST
PSG
PSIA
QAG
QER
RD&E
RETF
SAMES
SDP
SIL
SME
STD
SWAps
TA
TF
TFET
TLAAC
TLARDI
UN
UNDP
UNICEF
UNMIT
USAID
WBG
WBI
WDR

Prime Minister’s Office
Public-Private Partnership
Pension Reform Options
Simulation Toolkit
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding
Goal
Poverty and Social Impact
Analysis
Quality Assurance Group
Quality Enhancement Review
Research, Development and
Extension
Recipient-Executed Trust Fund
Autonomous Service of Medicines
and Health Equipment
Strategic Development Plan
Specific Investment Loan
Small and Medium Enterprises
Sexually Transmitted Disease
Sector Wide Approaches
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
Trust Fund for East Timor
Timor-Leste Agricultural Advisory
Committee
Timor-Leste Research and
Development Institute
United Nations
United Nations Development
Programme
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Integration
Mission in Timor-Leste
United States Agency for
International Development
World Bank Group
World Bank Institute
World Development Report

WORLD BANK

IFC

Vice President:

Axel van Trotsenburg

Karin Finkelston

Country Director:

Franz Drees-Gross

Sergio Pimenta

Country Manager:

Luis Constantino

Gavin Murray

Team Task Leader:

Luis Constantino / Pamela Dale

Milissa Day

FY2013 – 2017 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF TIMOR-LESTE

I.

II.
III.

IV.

V.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................ i
COUNTRY CONTEXT .....................................................................................................1
A.
EMERGING FROM FRAGILITY .......................................................................................1
B.
SUPPORTING MACROECONOMIC STABILITY AND THE NON-OIL ECONOMY ....................2
C.
REDUCING POVERTY AND PROMOTING OPPORTUNITY ..................................................5
D.
INVESTING IN THE QUALITY OF HUMAN C APITAL .........................................................6
E.
STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS, SPENDING, AND GOVERNANCE ...................................7
TIMOR-LESTE’S STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN ............................................8
REVIEW OF PAST WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT ....................................9
A.
LESSONS FROM CAS/ISN COMPLETION REPORT ..........................................................9
B.
FINDINGS FROM THE IEG COUNTRY PROGRAM EVALUATION ..................................... 10
C.
FEEDBACK FROM STAKEHOLDER C ONSULTATIONS .................................................... 10
D.
INTEGRATING LESSONS LEARNED FOR THE NEW CPS ................................................ 10
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY, FY2013-2017 ............................................. 11
A.
IMPLEMENTATION PRINCIPLES ..................................................................................11
B.
INSTRUMENTS ..........................................................................................................14
C.
STRATEGIC AREAS AND RESULTS ..............................................................................16
RESULTS AND RISKS ...................................................................................................21
A.
RESULTS FOCUS .......................................................................................................21
B.
MANAGING RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES ................................................................. 21

Boxes:
Box 1: Timor-Leste’s Petroleum Fund ......................................................................................................... 3
Box 2: Alignment of the CPS with the New Deal for Engagement with Fragile States ............................. 12
Figures:
Figure 1: Funding Sources for Public Spending, 2010-2016 (projected) ..................................................... 4
Tables:
Table 1: Indicative New IDA, IBRD, IFC Financing, Trust Funds, Global Partnerships, AAA, and IFC
Advisory Services (FY13-14) .................................................................................................................... 16
Table 2: Risks and Mitigation Strategies .................................................................................................... 22
Annexes:
Annex 1: Timor-Leste Country Partnership Strategy Results Matrix ......................................................... 24
Annex 2: Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report........................................................................ 34
Annex 3: Assessing Gender Disparities in Timor-Leste ............................................................................. 77
Annex 4: Commitments under the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States........................................ 79
Annex 5: Overview of Main Trust Funds ................................................................................................... 80
Annex 6: Summary of 2011 IMF/WB Debt Sustainability Analysis .......................................................... 81
Annex 7: Development Partner Focal Areas and Links to the Government’s Program ............................. 83
Annex 8: Standard Country Assistance Strategy Annexes ......................................................................... 85
Map of Timor-Leste: IBRD No. 33496R

Acknowledgements
The FY13-17 Timor-Leste Country Partnership Strategy was written by Pamela Dale under the
guidance of Luis Constantino and Milissa Day, with considerable assistance from the following
task team members: Hans Anand Beck, Amanda Green, David John Hook, Felix Maia, Jane
Distelhorst Sansbury, and João dos Santos.
Constructive feedback and substantive inputs were provided at the concept and drafting stage by
Sakuntala Akmeemana, Hamid Alavi, Catherine Anderson, Jock R. Anderson, Mitsuyoshi Asada,
Ziyad Bathiche, Chris Bleakley, Valery Ciancio, Franz Drees-Gross, Natasha Beschorner, Isabel
Blackett, Edie Bowles, Fabrizio Bresciani, Helle Buchhave, Mukesh Chawla, Dandan Chen,
Marguerite Clarke, Stephen Close, Larry Cui, Alan Cunningham, Franz Drees-Gross, Isabella
Drossos, Rideca Carvalho Duarte, Leslie Elder, Ozong Agborsangaya-Fiteu, Anthony Gorman,
Lene Ostergaard Jensen, Shyam KC, Laura Keenan, Michel Kerf, Vilija Kostelnickiene, YiKyoung Lee, Maria Belo Leite, Esther Loening, Catherine Sarah Martin, Andrew Mason, Juan
Carlos Mendoza, Jean-Baptiste Migraine, Mary Mulusa, Gavin Murray, Sheila Braka Musiime,
John Nasir, David Newhouse, John Nyaga, Junko Onishi, Reidun Otteroy, Truman Packard,
Sudesh Ponnappa, Josefina Posadas, Helene Carlsson Rex, Neil Saker, Yaye Seynabou Sakho,
Florencio Sanches, Ethel Sennhauser, Kanthan Shankar, Sudhir Shetty, Jose Ricardo Silva, Maria
Isabel Alda da Silva, Hoon Sabih Soh, Vivek Suri, Rob Taliercio, Roberto Tarallo, Natsuko Toba,
Anne Tully, Joel Turkewitz, Nithin Umapathi, Elise Vanormelingen, Lorena Vinuela, John Vivian,
Mitchell Wiener, Angela Williamson, Phillip Young, and Xiaoqing Yu.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Over the past decade, Timor-Leste has created the preconditions for successful development. It
has credibly emerged from a crisis of internal violence and political instability in 2006/7, built an
“inclusive enough” coalition, and increased tangible services for the population, creating a hard-won
political stability, absence of conflict and a new confidence in the state. Reflecting these
achievements, it underwent largely peaceful democratic elections for President (March and May
2012) and Parliament (June 2012), and an orderly transition to the Fifth Constitutional Government.
The United Nations Integrated Mission for Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and the International Stabilization
Force (ISF), both deployed following the 2006 crisis, completed their missions in December 2012
and have withdrawn from the country upon request from the government. The United Nations
Security Council, applauding Timor-Leste’s political and security achievements, ended its tutelage
over the country at the end of 2012.
Educating, keeping healthy, and productively employing its young population are the biggest
development challenges facing Timor-Leste in the next decade. With 60 percent of the population
under 25 years of age, the demographics are daunting. Reaping the benefits of high global oil prices,
Timor-Leste achieved lower middle-income status in 2011, but poverty remains persistently high,
particularly in the rural areas where the majority of the population lives. Oil revenues have funded an
expansion of social services to improve human development performance, but with limited capacity
in the public and private sector service providers. The job market struggles to provide for a
population growing at 2.41 percent per year. Important development indicators, such as infant and
maternal mortality, have improved, but indicators of child nutritional status have deteriorated. The
impressive increases in school enrollment have not been accompanied by improvements in
educational outcomes and low literacy rates persist, particularly for women and girls. Over 70
percent of total employment is vulnerable. Most of the rural poor rely upon low productivity
subsistence agriculture for livelihoods, and experience periods of food insecurity.
The Government is candid about the huge challenges the country faces and is looking for
solutions. Timor-Leste recently completed a fragility assessment to identify successes, as well as
remaining stressors that could derail stability. It is a leader in transparency (including compliance
with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, or EITI), and is leveraging its
accomplishments through leadership of the g7+ platform for engagement in fragile states. However,
the government recognizes that Timor-Leste remains the second most oil dependent economy in the
world, and known reserves are finite. With public spending funded almost entirely from the wealth
accumulated in its Petroleum Fund, medium-term fiscal sustainability is a concern. Government also
recognizes the limitations of the public sector, not atypical of a very young nation emerging from
conflict, and puts capacity building of people and institutions at the forefront of its priorities. To
create job opportunities for youth, sustain inclusive growth, and prepare for a future of potentially
declining natural resource returns, Timor-Leste needs to diversify its economy and sources of
revenue, elevate the quality of health and education services, and equip the population with viable
skills. In order for these efforts to be successful, they must be underpinned by capable institutions
with a strong and consistent focus on quality of spending and policies that nurture private investment.
Recognizing this imperative, the government has laid out its vision for private sector-led
growth to create jobs and income, and tackle persistent poverty. It conducted a participatory
planning process to design a Strategic Development Plan (SDP) for the 2011-2030 period. The SDP
offers a vision, targets and indicators, phased over the next two decades. It is built around four
pillars: (i) Social capital, which is comprised of health, education and social protection, and aims to
improve human development outcomes, create a labor force with marketable skills, and protect the
i

vulnerable; (ii) Infrastructure, including transport, telecommunication, power, and water supply and
sanitation, to increase connectivity, reduce transaction costs and attract private investment, and
facilitate access to services; (iii) Economic foundations, which targets three sectors for development
– agriculture, tourism and petrochemicals – to bring about non-oil growth, jobs, and new sources of
public revenues; and (iv) a cross-cutting theme, Institutions, for sound macroeconomic management,
to improve the capacity and effectiveness of state institutions through civil service reform and good
public financial management, and to strengthen mechanisms of oversight, including the transparency
of public decision-making.
The Bank Group's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) is fully aligned with the Government
of Timor-Leste’s (GoTL) SDP and sets out a focused program of lending, analytical and
advisory work (AAA), trust funds (TFs) and convening services grouped around the four
pillars in the SDP. The World Bank Group (WBG) will assist the 5th constitutional government to
establish the building blocks for a non-oil economy through catalytic investments in priority sectors
and demonstrable improvements in institutional quality and in the quality of public spending. In
particular, the WBG will help the government to (i) invest in the quality of health and education
services and the effectiveness of social protection programs; (ii) build core infrastructure to connect
communities to services and markets and reduce transaction costs; and (iii) support the development
of a non-oil economy that creates jobs by improving the enabling environment for private sector
investment and augmenting the productivity and value-added of agriculture. Underpinning each of
these activities will be a focus on leveraging knowledge to strengthen the capacity of public sector
institutions to improve the quality of spending of the country’s finite oil wealth. Each activity
planned during the CPS period is designed to increase the government’s capacity to deliver core
services, by putting in place essential institutional building blocks – including systems and policies
and a well-equipped civil service. Stronger institutions will not only contribute to better and more
transparent service delivery over the long-term, but will also ensure that Timor-Leste’s time-limited
natural resource wealth is used productively.
The CPS marks a number of transitions. First, it reflects the lessons learned from the Bank
Group's previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, 2005) and Interim Strategy Note (ISN, 2009),
which in hindsight were overly ambitious and broad for a fragile, post-conflict development context.
As a result, the CPS recognizes both the need to be more selective and flexible in order to meet
development priorities as they evolve. Second, after a decade in which the Bank's financial
instruments involved only International Development Association (IDA) grants (with substantial
donor co-financing through trust funds), the present CPS marks a transition to a program of IDA
credits and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loans that reflects both
Timor-Leste's economic growth and its capacity to finance its own development through oil revenues
and limited debt. Finally, the CPS period (FY13-17) is fully aligned with the GoTL's term in office
and fully consistent with the transition from post-conflict stabilization to a carefully calibrated
program of national development.

ii

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

1.
The WBG’s FY2010-2011 Interim Strategy Note was developed in the aftermath of
violence that left one-tenth of the population displaced and highlighted remaining political and
social divisions in the young nation. The 2006-7 crisis was the product of institutional weaknesses
of the security forces, elite political tensions, and the massive social and economic disruptions
remaining from the post-referendum violence of 1999. Following a deterioration of public order and
the breakdown of basic government functions, the 4th constitutional government, which came to
power in 2007, concentrated on resolving grievances, rebuilding public trust, and securing internal
peace. Long-term strategic planning and efforts to shore up and diversify the petroleum-dominated
economy commenced, but substantial uncertainty remained about both government priorities and the
operating environment. In this environment of uncertainty, an ISN was chosen to provide greater
flexibility and responsiveness to emerging priorities.
2.
Since the crisis, Timor-Leste has become increasingly economically independent, with
own-resources far surpassing Official Development Assistance (ODA), and has provided a
country-led direction for development with the issuance of a Strategic Development Plan
(SDP). In support of this plan, and cognizant that a weak public sector is the main impediment to
development, the government requested that the WBG provide: (i) discrete analytical and technical
assistance for capacity-building linked to development priorities; and (ii) operations in critical areas
that offer demonstration effects and high potential for replication in government investments. Though
challenges remain on the pathway out of fragility, and there are substantial risks in the current
development trajectory, there will be a clear evolution for the WBG from assistance to partnership,
reflected in the shift to a Country Partnership Strategy for fiscal years 2013-2017. 1
A. EMERGING FROM FRAGILITY
3.
At independence in 2002, the new Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste inherited the
daunting task of rebuilding a state from the ground up 2. Occupation and conflict left behind
poorly functioning and understaffed government institutions, and destroyed basic infrastructure. Over
95 percent of schools and 80 percent of health centers had been destroyed, and human resources
depleted as teachers and professionals fled the country. More than one in ten children were dying
before they reached their fifth birthday.
4.
Development achievements over the past decade are substantial, but the 2006/07
internal violence was a sobering call to leaders that many stressors remained. The government
that came into power in 2007 focused on creating an inclusive coalition with a stake in stability and
in generating confidence that the state was prepared to respond to the needs of its people. It
established a system of cash transfers to address demands of the veterans of the resistance, as well as
the elderly and poor families, funded through the oil revenue windfall. It rapidly increased
expenditures in highly visible areas such as power supply and distributed funds in districts and sub
districts for smaller scale infrastructure, to create jobs and support the nascent private sector through
contracts that spread rewards across party lines and affiliations.

1

The CPS duration is designed to coincide with the mandate of the 5th constitutional government.
After the departure of the Portuguese colonial administration in 1975 and a brief but violent internal conflict for
power, the Indonesian army occupied the territory, triggering an armed resistance that fought the occupation until
1999 when a referendum confirmed that the vast majority of the Timorese wanted independence. This was followed
again by a violent conflict until 2002 when independence was formally recognized.

2

1

5.
After five years of hard won stability and absence of conflict, Timor-Leste is looking
towards the next five years as an opportunity to sustain growth, accelerate development and
reduce poverty. The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste and International
Stabilization Force (ISF), both of which were deployed to Timor-Leste following the 2006 crisis,
ended their mandates in December of 2012 and the United Nations (UN) Security Council terminated
its oversight of Timor-Leste upon request of the government. While confident in continued stability,
the government is also candid about risks, recognizing that decisions made to reduce fragility in the
short term, for example cash payments and procurement practices, could spawn or deepen political
fractures, undermine institutional effectiveness, and endanger fiscal sustainability over the long term.
6.
The government led a Fragility Assessment in mid-2012 to identify remaining stressors
that could undermine Timor-Leste’s stability and derail the development process. The Fragility
Assessment reviewed Timor-Leste’s progress against five Peacebuilding and Statebuilding Goals
(PSGs) agreed as part of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. 3 The assessment concluded
that Timor-Leste has made substantial progress in Legitimate Politics and Security, reflecting the
recent stability, a functioning parliament, and a sense of political inclusion across different groups.
The assessment also identified some progress on Revenues and Services, although overdependence
upon oil and inadequate budget execution were identified as risks. Justice still faced severe
shortfalls; some participants in the consultations characterized it to be at “crisis” level given limited
access to formal justice and the degree of impunity prevailing in the country, in particular with the
perceived increase in corruption. Economic Foundations remain weak, as demonstrated by
persistently high youth unemployment, poor human development outcomes, regional inequities and
food vulnerability. Other potential stressors include perceptions of unfairness in the distribution of oil
revenues, eventual reductions of cash transfers due to fiscal constraints, the return of refugees, and
latent land disputes and grievances.
B. SUPPORTING MACROECONOMIC STABILITY AND THE NON-OIL ECONOMY
7.
Timor-Leste remains the second most oil-dependent country in the world, yet known
reserves are limited. Timor-Leste’s oil wealth, which is collected in the Petroleum Fund (PF) and
drawn into the state budget, provides fiscal space and supports imports essential for development.
But reserves from fields currently under production may not last beyond 2025 at current rates of
extraction, and revenues are estimated to have peaked at US$2.8 billion in 2011. The Greater Sunrise
gas fields could extend the natural resource windfall, and other discoveries may yet be made, but for
such an oil-dependent economy, caution is necessary in the face of uncertainty. Future generations
will only benefit from this wealth if it is well invested. Finite petroleum wealth provides only a
window of opportunity to build a non-oil economy and the foundation for inclusive and sustainable
growth. The choices made over the CPS period will thus shape Timor-Leste’s economic future.
8.
The government is drawing double the estimated sustainable income (ESI) from the PF
to address pressing development needs, but could risk fiscal sustainability, especially if it does
not maintain a high quality of public investments. The PF is the reservoir for Timor-Leste’s
petroleum revenues, and is currently worth nearly US$11 billion, or around ten times non-oil gross
domestic product (GDP). It is EITI compliant, and shields the budget from increasingly volatile oil
3

The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States is a compact championed by the g7+ group of fragile and conflict
affected countries and regions, a multi-government advocacy and policy body made up of 18 countries across
Africa, Asia, and the Pacific. Forty countries and international organizations, including the World Bank, endorsed
the New Deal at the Fourth High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan (November 2011). The New Deal
establishes new principles for development architecture (outlined in Annex 3) and calls for new ways of working
that better respond to the needs and challenges faced by fragile countries.

2

prices. The non-oil deficit (total public spending less domestic revenue) was 130 percent of non-oil
GDP in 2011, and was financed by PF withdrawals. These excess withdrawals will, on present
assumptions, slow the growth in the value of the PF and ESI, but may also spur non-oil growth and
generate partially compensating domestic revenues. Fiscal sustainability is heavily dependent on
improving the quality of public spending and selecting and implementing projects that build a
sufficient non-oil revenue base. This revenue rebalancing, together with planned medium-term cuts
to public spending, is designed to protect fiscal sustainability and ensure appropriate consideration
and weight is given to the long-term needs of the country. But cuts, especially to recurrent spending,
could prove difficult, and would require limited or no nominal increases in salaries and benefits for
civil servants, public transfers and capital expenditure. The government is also considering deficit
financing, and contracted foreign debt for the first time in 2012. It is also exploring public-private
partnerships (PPPs) with, among others, the International Finance Corporation (IFC).
Box 1: Timor-Leste’s Petroleum Fund 4
The design of Timor-Leste’s Petroleum Fund is widely considered international best practice. It
was established by the Petroleum Fund Law of 2005, revised in 2011. With a design drawing from
the Norwegian experience, it is intended to provide transparency and accountability on the use of
public revenues, protect public finances from income volatility, and help strike the appropriate
balance between current spending and savings for future generations.
Management. The Fund is an account with the Central Bank which has been designated the
Operational Manager of the Petroleum Fund. External investment managers can be contracted to
manage investments. The Petroleum Fund Law requires that all assets are invested abroad, with at
least 50 percent invested in investment grade bank deposits and debt instruments; up to 50 percent
invested in equities in regulated financial markets; and up to 5 percent invested in other asset
classes.
Withdrawals. Transfers from the Fund can only be made to the single state treasury account.
Transfers are contingent upon the government providing parliament with a report specifying the
Estimated Sustainable Income (ESI), calculated each year as 3 percent of the sum of the Fund
balance and the present value of expected future petroleum receipts. The ESI is certified by an
independent auditor.
Savings. To preserve the real value of the country’s petroleum wealth, withdrawals from the Fund
are guided by the ESI. Withdrawing more than ESI requires the government to provide parliament
with a detailed explanation of why it is in the long-term interests of the country, and also a report
certified by the independent auditor estimating the impact on future ESI.
Transparency. Revenues and transfers into the government budget are publicly disclosed. All
petroleum revenue and investment income goes into the Fund. Withdrawals can only be used to
finance expenditures of the state budget. The Central Bank publishes quarterly reports on the
performance and activities of the Fund. The government submits an annual report with an audited
financial statement. Details on revenue and composition of the investment portfolio are also fully
disclosed.
Performance. The Petroleum Fund is currently valued at about US$11 billion. It has grown in
value above expectations due to soaring oil prices. The present value of petroleum wealth
including the Petroleum Fund is estimated at $26 billion. The ESI is estimated to be about $750
million. Since 2008, government spending has exceeded the ESI.
4

Box 1 was derived, with minor edits, from the IMF 2009 Country Report No. 09/220.

3

9.
Timor-Leste’s economy has performed admirably, but is sensitive to global oil prices,
and subject to fiscal risks and inflation. The economy is officially dollarized, which helps to
mitigate, though does not fully prevent, the Dutch Disease that can afflict resource rich economies.
Annual non-oil economic growth averaged nearly 12 percent over the past five years and is projected
to remain at double-digit levels during the CPS period, outpacing the rest of the East Asia and Pacific
region, though from a very low base. Growth is largely driven by public spending, 90 percent of
which is petroleum-financed. Services related to trade and transport also contribute to growth, as
does agriculture, which together with tourism and a downstream petro-chemical industry underpin
the government’s hopes for economic diversification. However, agriculture in particular is
underdeveloped and characterized by low productivity, contributing to persistent poverty and food
insecurity in rural areas.
Figure 1: Funding Sources for Public Spending, 2010-2016 (projected)

10.
Medium-term inflation is forecast to remain near double digits, as public spending adds
to aggregate demand, and supply bottlenecks persist. Despite easing to 11 percent in July 2012,
inflation (as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in Dili) has been on the rise, peaking at
17.7 percent in January 2012. Other major determinants of inflation are global food prices (food
constitutes 60 percent of the CPI basket and half of all food is imported) and the depreciation of the
US dollar relative to Timor-Leste’s major trading partners, both of which constitute upside risk
factors. Higher-quality public spending would ease pressures by enhancing the economy’s supply
side and absorptive capacity. Persistently high inflation, while common in high-growth situations,
exacerbates poverty and compromises competitiveness and economic diversification in the longer
term. This concern is fuelled by a recently agreed minimum wage of US$115/month, one of the
highest relative-to-average wages in the world.

4

C. REDUCING POVERTY AND PROMOTING OPPORTUNITY
11.
Poverty was measured at 49.9 percent in 2007 and preliminary analysis in advance of a
planned household survey and poverty assessment suggests there may be some persistence. The
assessment will need to consider the inclusiveness of Timor-Leste’s economic growth and the
poverty impacts of the increasing public spending on basic services and social protection.
12.
Low agricultural production and persistent food insecurity remain pressing concerns,
and are priorities for growth and poverty reduction. Agriculture remains an important buffer that
absorbs excess labor, albeit with low value-added and salaries. Over 70 percent of the population,
and over 80 percent of the female workforce, is engaged in subsistence agriculture, where low crop
yields persist. Annual rice and periodic maize deficits contribute to malnutrition rates that are among
the highest in the world. Shortfalls in agricultural production are driven by poor agricultural
management practices, liquidity constraints which limit access to commercial inputs, poor
infrastructure and high market access costs, and insufficient agricultural investment, both public and
private. Improving agricultural yields and expanding income opportunities in rural upland and
highland areas, including through production of coffee, other cash crops, and high-value hardwoods
for the export market, will be essential to reduce rural poverty. These expanded income
opportunities, coupled with enhanced access for the poor to better basic services, will help tackle
inequality, which is shown to have widened slightly since 2007.
13.
Though Timor-Leste is very minor emitter of greenhouse gases, it is vulnerable to the
effects of climate change and natural disasters. Timor-Leste is prone to frequent landslides,
destructive winds, and droughts. Also faces a substantial risk of earthquakes and potentially tsunamis
in a few points on the southern coast. Its mountainous terrain makes it particularly prone to floods,
which often destroy infrastructure and homes and further endanger crops. 63.7 percent of households
in Timor-Leste reported a natural or biological shock in 20105 and a majority reported spending
savings or selling productive assets to cope with the impacts.
14.
The private sector has substantial growth potential, and is expected to drive growth in
the priority sectors identified in the SDP, but faces significant constraints in the investment
environment, and infrastructure bottlenecks. The Government of Timor-Leste made some
progress in 2012 toward improving the investment climate by passing regulation for a One Stop Shop
for business entry to reduce the time required to start a business. It also passed a law on collateral,
and approved a PPP Law. Access to credit, including microcredit, has improved in the past year, but
large unmet demand for finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises remains, with 270,000
unbanked citizens (even not counting people outside the cash economy) and the potential for 80,000
new borrowers. Small and medium enterprise linkages, essential to growth, are underdeveloped.
Commercial credit is constrained by weak institutions for contract enforcement, a significant barrier
to foreign direct investment. The persistent lack of legal clarity around land ownership and usage
rights and the potential for conflict around land expropriations and evictions from state land are also
substantial impediments. Infrastructure constraints–including poorly-maintained roads, airports with
low passenger and freight capacity, the high cost and low usage rates of telecommunications, and
slow operation of ports–continue to impede business development, raising the cost of inputs and
limiting market access.

5

Data derived from the 2010 HIES.

5

15.
Timor-Leste enjoys a substantial demographic dividend, but capitalizing on this
requires investments in skills development to meet the needs of the labor market. An estimated
61.5 percent of the population is under 25 years of age; this proportion is expected to decrease only
slightly to 59.2 percent by 2025. 6 At 14 percent, the labor force participation rate of young people
(aged 15-24) is low by regional standards and a serious education and skills gap, as well as the
limited development of the non-oil private sector, hinders their ability to find productive
employment. 7 Young women in particular are underrepresented in the labor force, with a
participation rate of just 10 percent. The demographics feed the urgency of promoting growth that
can absorb the labor supply materializing in the coming years, and to public education, health, and
training services to build a productive, qualified, and skilled population.
D. INVESTING IN THE QUALITY OF HUMAN CAPITAL
16.
Though it has made progress towards its Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets
in critical areas, including reductions in under-5 and infant mortality rates and literacy gains
for some groups, Timor-Leste is unlikely to reach its MDG targets by 2015. 8 Timor-Leste ranks
147th out of 187 countries on the UN’s Human Development Index (HDI 2011); HDI has been
increasing slowly since a post-crisis decline in 2007. Despite increased access to education, primary
school completion rates remain low. Education quality is a concern; a 2009 Early Grade Reading
Assessment (EGRA) found that 70 percent of students were unable to read a single word of a simple
text by the end of grade one, decreasing to 20 percent by the end of grade three. Childhood
malnutrition likely contributes to low school achievement rates, poor health outcomes, and low
productivity, and remains a significant concern. Levels of both stunting and wasting increased
between 2003 and 2009. The maternal mortality ratio is also among the highest in the world
(557/100,000 live births), reflecting weak health systems, poor infrastructure, and insufficient care
for mothers during pregnancy and delivery. 9
17.
Achievements in gender equality have been mixed, and gender disparities remain within
households, markets, and institutions. Gender equality is enshrined in the Constitution and
international conventions to which Timor-Leste is a signatory; however, enforcement of legislation is
weak in areas such as protection from gender-based violence. 10 Violence outside the household
disproportionately impacts men, as both perpetrators and victims of crime. The gender gap in
education has shrunk at the primary and pre-secondary levels, but girls’ school enrollment declines
substantially at the secondary and tertiary levels. Child mortality and undernutrition rates are high for

6

Data derived from World Bank Pension Reform Options Simulation Toolkit (PROST) modeling, based on 2010
census figures.
7
Labor force participation statistics sourced through the 2010 Timor-Leste Labor Force Survey.
8
The g7+ argue that MDGs should not be their immediate target as consolidating peace and ensuring stability are
their foremost priorities; very few fragile countries will meet any of the MDGs by 2015. The g7+ are developing
PSG indicators as part of the New Deal to monitor performance as a short-term alternative to MDGs.
9
Timor-Leste is unlikely to achieve MDG5 on improved maternal health. Poor performance on maternal health has
a variety of causes, including poor quality and coverage in rural areas, lack of information on family planning and
reproductive health, and low prevalence and quality of antenatal care.
10
The latest demographic and health survey (2010) finds that approximately one-third of women (38 percent) have
experienced physical violence since age 15. One percent of women experienced physical violence often, while 28
percent experienced physical violence sometimes in the past 12 months (National Statistics Directorate, et al, 2010.
Timor-Leste Demographic and Health Survey 2009-2010. Dili: National Statistics Directorate). The police
Vulnerable Persons Unit reports over 1,000 cases of domestic violence per year in Dili alone, and calculates that for
every reported case, at least ten are unreported.

6

both genders, but affect boys disproportionately. 11 Labor force participation rates and wages are
lower for women. According to an IFC report on Economic Opportunities for Women in the Pacific,
women are heavily represented in work in subsistence agriculture, and make up over 40 percent of
microentrepreneurs. However, just 16 percent of formalized businesses in Timor-Leste are owned by
women. While formalization is challenging for both genders, women face additional barriers due to
lower literacy rates, poor financial literacy, and lack of collateral due in part to limited access to land
ownership. Adjusted for household size, female-headed households are poorer than male-headed
households. On the positive side, women’s representation in senior decision-making positions,
including parliamentary positions and ministerial appointments, is high by regional standards.
18.
Timor-Leste’s social protection programs are among the most generous in the
developing world, but were designed to consolidate peace, not to address poverty. Cash transfers
commenced in 2008 for veterans of the resistance and their survivors, the elderly, people with
disabilities, and vulnerable children. School feeding, cash-for-work, rice importation and subsidy
programs, and most recently a civil service pension complement these programs. At 9 percent,
Timor-Leste is a leader in the region in the proportion of the government budget allocated to social
protection spending. However, recent data suggest that the poverty impact of these programs is not
commensurate with the level of spending, reflecting implementation challenges and the lack of
poverty-focused targeting. 12 There are also growing concerns that the substantial entitlements,
particularly those for veterans and their survivors, are fiscally unsustainable, and the distribution of
subsidized rice may have a negative impact on domestic staple food production.
E. STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS, SPENDING, AND GOVERNANCE
19.
Timor-Leste has made progress in establishing the institutions of the state. The
architecture of the state is in place, and institutional credibility is growing. Yet, capacity remains
weak and the government has identified the strengthening of institutions as a priority area of
assistance to improve service delivery and outcomes. A recent report on Timor-Leste by the World
Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) noted that the development of state institutions from
2000 to 2010 had proved especially challenging in this new country due to the low human skills base,
language barriers, and the absence of effective capacity building strategies. Furthermore, achieving
basic governance transformations takes time. For example, bringing corruption under control took
the fastest reformers an average of 27 years.
20.
Rapidly increasing public spending in face of still weak institutions raises concerns over
corruption. Timor-Leste has taken some high profile measures to counter corruption, such as
participation in the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative, and it made substantial improvement
in the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index between 2011 and 2012. 13 However,
the government’s audit reports presented to Parliament have observed that control of underlying
corruption at a time of rapidly increasing public spending is proving extremely challenging. The
government needs to address the increasing concerns over corruption and send strong signals that
corruption will not be tolerated, in particular by addressing the impunity resulting from weaknesses
in the justice system. The transparency of government actions on budgeting, spending and
procurement through on-line platforms are an important step in this direction, as they make

11

The disproportional rate of malnutrition and child mortality among boys could be due to biological differences
between boys and girls, or cultural practices such as child feeding. Research on this topic is ongoing.
12
With the exception of a conditional cash transfer for children in poor households, none of the cash transfers
implemented by the government are explicitly poverty targeted.
13
Timor-Leste’s was ranked 143 out of 182 countries in the 2011 index, and moved to 113 of 176 countries in 2012.

7

information available in a timely fashion to the public at large, but more needs to be done to
empower citizens to interpret and act on this information.
21.
The WBG will help the government to strengthen institutions that have a significant
impact on achievement of the Strategic Development Plan. This institutional strengthening will
support a gradual transition away from the current heavy reliance on external advisors for line
Ministry functions. Increased institutional performance over the budget and project cycles has the
potential to contribute significantly to economic growth.
II.

TIMOR-LESTE’S STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN

22.
The SDP (2011-2030) lays out an ambitious agenda aimed at propelling Timor-Leste to
upper middle income country status, eradicating extreme poverty, and establishing a
diversified economy by 2030. Growth projections in the strategy assume high oil prices and
substantial government expenditure 14 over the first decade to build the foundations for increased
private sector investment and economic diversification. The SDP is built on three pillars: (i) social
capital, covering human development, gender, and social inclusion; (ii) infrastructure development;
and (iii) economic development for a non-oil economy. A fourth cross-cutting pillar addresses
institutions and macroeconomic foundations that underpin implementation. The essence of the SDP
can be summarized as:


Continue investing in human capital through improved access and quality of health,
education and skills development while protecting the vulnerable. Private sector
investment, productivity, and economic growth require a healthy, well-educated population,
with skills matched to the job market. The SDP outlines a strategy of investments in
education and health infrastructure and facilities to keep up with the growing population, as
well as increased investments in human resources development, and developing education
and health standards to improve service quality. Vocational training and investments through
the Human Capital Development Fund are expected to build the appropriate skills to employ
the population in planned growth sectors (e.g., agriculture, petroleum, tourism, construction).
The SDP prioritizes social inclusion, with specific targets for women’s access to education
and health services, and commitments to provide assistance for vulnerable families, youth,
and other at-risk populations.



Use natural resource wealth to fund catalytic infrastructure. Inadequate, costly, and
poorly-maintained infrastructure (e.g., roads, telecommunications) is a critical binding
constraint both for private sector development and access to services, namely health and
education. The SDP proposes constructing or upgrading national, regional, and rural roads in
a climate-resilient manner; improving access to clean water and adequate sanitation;
establishing new seaports to contend with an increasing port volume; upgrading airports to
meet growing passenger numbers; and further liberalizing the telecommunications market to
increase the availability of bandwidth.



Encourage private sector investment, and diversify the economy to sustain growth and
employment. Due to the finite nature of natural resource wealth and the need to create jobs,
petroleum wealth should be used to support economic diversification, particularly in the
downstream petrochemical industry, tourism, and agriculture. A major public investment in
the “Tasi Mane” development project–a supply base, liquefied natural gas (LNG) plant, and

14

The SDP 2011 and 2015 expenditure targets are $758.2 million and $1,375.7 million, respectively. At $1,093
million, 2011 budget execution surpassed this target expenditure in the first SDP year; the 2012 budget contains
$1,674.1 million in planned expenditures.

8

petrochemicals and refinery site–is at the center of the SDP growth strategy, although
analysis of the pros and cons of this investment needs to be completed. The SDP identified
three areas for tourism development, with some of the planned infrastructure designed to
service tourism. Investments in agriculture include improved seeds and fertilizers, better
storage, and expanded agricultural extension services. The SDP emphasizes investments in
food crops, including rice, maize, and tubers, to contribute to food security and nutrition, and
in cash crops (e.g. coffee, hardwoods), livestock, and fisheries to augment value-added and
rural incomes.


Expand the foundations of good governance and institutional effectiveness. Currently,
the public sector is Timor-Leste’s dominant employer and vehicle for economic growth. To
improve its effectiveness, the SDP prioritizes civil service reforms, public financial
management (particularly budget planning and execution), and public sector service delivery,
including through decentralization, building on some success and experience with
subnational spending modalities. In light of the large investments to be financed by the
petroleum fund, the SDP recognizes the need for robust ex-ante scrutiny of projects to avoid
wastage and strengthen implementation capacity, including in the design and management of
PPPs. Institutions of oversight and anti-corruption will also be strengthened, as will notable
instruments already in place to ensure transparency and accountability of government
processes, including EITI.

23.
The SDP provides a clear direction for development, but needs costing, sector-level
planning, prioritization, and implementation support to be actionable. Some sectors produced
sector plans as inputs to the SDP. Agriculture and public works have recently finalized their sector
plans. The SDP provides a sufficiently precise set of results and outcomes for the short, medium, and
long term against which to measure progress. Government strategy is thus reflected in the SDP,
sector plans of the 5th government, and in the Fragility Assessment with a considerable degree of
consistency, and these will be an important guide for the CPS.
III.

REVIEW OF PAST WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT

A. LESSONS FROM CAS/ISN COMPLETION REPORT
24.
The WBG in Timor-Leste had a mixed record of success in the previous CAS (FY200608) and ISN (FY2010-11) periods. The CAS/ISN Completion Report (Attachment 2) assesses WBG
performance in the engagement period as Moderately Unsatisfactory. While progress was made
towards achieving most major expected outcomes, the program was overly ambitious and
insufficiently focused given the nation’s capacity challenges in the immediate post-Independence
period. The following lessons from the CAS/ISN Completion Report have informed the development
of the FY2013-17 CPS:


Set appropriate objectives for what can be achieved in a four-year timeframe, and guide
resources to key priorities. Fragile and post-conflict states are inherently dynamic
environments, and their development trajectory is not linear. Setbacks should be expected,
and the results framework should temper ambition with pragmatism. The CPS must retain
maximum flexibility to respond to emerging priorities. The CPS Progress Report provides a
timely opportunity to reevaluate and update the CPS.



Achieving the government’s development vision and CPS objectives requires a continued
effort to strengthen Timor-Leste’s institutions and build implementation capacity. The
growth in Timor-Leste’s budget and development ambitions has outpaced gains in civil
9

service capacity. In the CPS period, Timor-Leste’s priority development need will not be in
financing, but rather support to institutional development and technical know-how.
Operational investments will continue to be just one facet of a multidimensional program,
buttressed by high-quality, creatively disseminated analytical work; just-in-time advice;
convening power; organizational support; and sustained policy dialogue.


In keeping with the institution-building focus, implementation in Timor-Leste requires
intensive, hands-on support through a sustained engagement. Successful approaches,
whether for analytical inputs or project implementation, are process-intensive, timeconsuming, and gain more traction when accompanied by dialogue, technical assistance, and
intensive supervision. WBG’s human resources must be allocated accordingly.
B. FINDINGS FROM THE IEG COUNTRY PROGRAM EVALUATION

25.
IEG’s Country Program Evaluation (CPE) of WBG efforts (2000-2010) also provided
several recommendations that have been taken into account during CPS preparation, as follows:


Prioritize programs and accompany then with realistic timelines. Progress should be
monitored against a small number of measurable key results.



Increase the focus on agriculture, human resource development and institution building,
areas in which the previous CAS and ISN underinvested and performed poorly.



Scale up the IFC’s engagement, in partnership with the IBRD, to enable it to help address the
remaining constraints to private sector development.



Aim for simplicity in project design, intensive fiduciary support, and partnerships with
government, civil society, and other development actors.
C. FEEDBACK FROM STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS

26.
The strategic areas and activities proposed in the FY2013-17 CPS reflect the priorities
identified during stakeholder consultations. Community consultations were held in eight districts
and with Dili youth in 2011 and 2012, and proved a useful testing ground for the WBG strategy in
the conceptualization phase. Women were well-represented in the consultations, which were planned
in partnership with local nongovernmental organizations that were tasked to recruit community
leaders both within and outside of local power structures, and of varying age and gender. A series of
small group discussions with influential thinkers, business leaders, and civil society representatives
helped to further refine the approach and better situate the WBG program within Timor-Leste’s
wider development agenda, and expand the WBG role as a knowledge leader. The WBG timed the
final development of the CPS to allow for alignment with the program of the Fifth Constitutional
Government, which was formed in August 2012.

D. INTEGRATING LESSONS LEARNED FOR THE NEW CPS
27.
Going forward, the World Bank Group will assist the government of Timor-Leste by:
(i) engaging in highly visible priority areas that have a strong potential to demonstrate impact;
(ii) providing assistance in a timely and digestible manner; and (iii) ensuring adequate staffing
for consistent engagement. This new strategy of engagement will enable the WBG to address
stakeholder demands, focus its program and resources while ensuring flexibility to meet emerging
needs, and show clear, monitorable results within the CPS timeframe.

10

IV.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY, FY2013-2017

A. IMPLEMENTATION PRINCIPLES
28.
The CPS will reflect the activities of the entire WBG, as well as corporate priorities. The
CPS combines the strategies and instruments of IDA, IBRD, and IFC. If the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) becomes active in Timor-Leste, it will also be brought under the
framework of the CPS. The CPS will strive to address corporate priorities such as gender and climate
change, as well as World Bank Global Programs, which are currently receiving insufficient attention
at the country level.
29.
In face of considerable uncertainty, the CPS will be flexible. Timor-Leste is a dynamic
country, undergoing a process of learning and experimentation, and traversing a non-linear path out
of fragility. It recently contracted its first debt, and it has yet to develop a borrowing relationship with
the WBG. This contributes to a level of uncertaibnty and unpredictability in the operating
environment, and mandates that the CPS maximize flexibility to accommodate internal and external
change affecting Timor-Leste, and its changing development needs. The approach of the CPS is first,
to allocate resources only for activities that are already on-going or about to commence, and leave
open the focus of assistance for outer CPS years; and second, to concentrate the IDA and IBRD
lending envelopes on a very small number of operations, releasing administrative budgets and staff
resources to support knowledge products and hands-on dialogue and technical assistance. Knowledge
products will be managed flexibly and will be identified on the basis of periodic discussions with the
government.
30.
In line with the WBG’s overall commitment, the CPS will assist the Government of
Timor-Leste (GoTL) to implement the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States. Timor-Leste
has been a vocal advocate of the New Deal (Box 2) through its leadership of the g7+ group of fragile
states, and it is one of seven New Deal pilot countries. It is now defining priorities for country level
implementation of the New Deal, including use of country systems, and the WBG has been a strong
partner in this process. The government’s Fragility Assessment also identified priorities for
assistance, several of which the WBG will support.

11

Box 2: Alignment of the CPS with the New Deal for Engagement with Fragile States
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding Goals: The WBG will focus on the PSGs of Economic
Foundations, by helping create the building blocks for a non-oil economy, Revenues and Services,
through improved services in health an education and the development of revenue sources other
than oil, and within the critical Justice sector by supporting the design and implementation of a
land policy, identified as one of the potential stressors of further conflict and a key constraint to
private sector investment.
One Vision, One Plan: The WBG will support implementation of the SDP and the government’s
program, and will coincide with the country’s democratic cycle.
Compact: The WBG is aligned to country-led national priorities and will harmonize interventions
with other donors, to the extent possible.
Using PSGs to Monitor: The WBG will incorporate the PSGs, once completed, in its results matrix
to monitor progress against CPS outcomes.
Support Political Dialogue and Leadership: The CPS has been developed consultatively with the
government, civil society, women, and youth, and its implementation and monitoring will continue
to rely on ongoing consultations with these groups.
Transparency: The WBG program will be reflected in and make use of the government’s Aid
Management System.
Risk-Sharing: The WBG will monitor and review risks of implementation together with
implementing agencies.
Use of Country Systems: The WBG will strive towards the use of country systems, particularly in
financial management, and will assist the government in strengthening those systems.
Capacity Building: The WBG will continue to focus on national capacity building in its sectoral
engagements and knowledge exchange.
Timely and Predictable Aid: The WBG will agree up front with the government on the timing and
level of planned financial assistance.
31.
The CPS will be selective, prioritizing: (i) discrete analytical and technical assistance
linked to development priorities and major investments; and (ii) operations in critical areas
that offer demonstration effects and high potential for replication in future government
investments. The share of international aid in public spending is declining rapidly as the government
budget expands, financed by withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund. The WBG’s resources are
modest in Timor-Leste; and the consolidated trust funds through which bilateral agencies previously
channeled resources through the Bank are declining. Most requests for assistance from the
government are for support for the quality of its own spending, and given the sizeable and expanding
government budget, this is how the WBG can maximize its impact. Recent experience supports this
approach. Previous economic and sector work (ESW), such as advice on the PF and social protection
and technical assistance in public management, responded directly to government demand for
targeted advice in priority areas, and contributed to important results. Most operations, including
health, education and social protection, also focus on strengthening systems and capacity within line
ministries. Even more traditional investment projects, such as road rehabilitation, are small relative to
needs, and aim to demonstrate good practices, develop implementation capacity, and establish

12

standards that can be replicated in the government’s own programs. Similarly, the IFC is involved
primarily in the provision of Advisory Services, for example on PPPs.
32.
In addition to its partnership with government, the WBG will maintain the strong
working relationships that exist with development partners. (See Attachment 7 for an overview
of development partner focal areas in Timor-Leste.) Total ODA is estimated at US$169 million in
2012. 15 Of this, Australia contributed by far the largest share, about US$74.7 million, followed by
UN agencies, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the European Union (EU), and others. Foreign
aid is concentrated in governance, health, education, agriculture, and public works, which are also
areas of focus of the WBG. In addition to informal frequent meetings, complementarity and
comparative advantage are ensured in two ways. First, in asserting its leadership of the development
process, the government chairs periodic meetings with development partners on national priorities
and pillars of the SDP and requires that all foreign assistance support the SDP. The Aid Effectiveness
Portal, an online information tool, contains detailed data on development partner activities. Second, a
significant portion of the WBG portfolio is funded or co-financed by development partners; between
FY10 and FY12, the country program disbursed US$38.46 million in recipient-executed trust funds
and an additional US$7.6 million under Bank-executed trust funds, compared to US$12.61 in IDA
disbursements and US$3.6 million in Bank budget resources. In the CPS period, the World Bank is
pursuing two additional Bank-executed multi-sector TFs with AusAid and the European Union, as
well as continuing to implement existing World Bank TFs to support a knowledge-oriented CPS. In
addition to helping extend the limited Bank administrative budget and allowing the deployment of
staff with the right skills, these funds strengthen critical coordination in a small donor space.
33.
In recognition of the urgent gender-related needs in Timor-Leste, gender will be
mainstreamed throughout the WBG program. Early in the CPS period, the World Bank will
conduct a gender assessment to identify areas where gaps in development partner support might be
filled by WBG interventions, and will develop a Country Gender Action Plan (CGAP) based on this
assessment. This will be supplemented by a Public Expenditure Review (PER) examining genderfocused public spending, as well as data disaggregation within projects, to the extent possible.
Gender issues will also be addressed through components of existing operations: For example, the
WBG will address equal access to endowments through programs in health, education and social
protection which support improved expenditure practices to increase quality of services for both
genders. Planned programs in skills development and nutrition have a clear gender dimension. The
WBG education activities also include support for girls’ bathrooms in schools, an intervention with
proven impact on adolescent girls’ school attendance. Equal access to economic opportunities will be
supported through planned work in the areas of agriculture, land, and private sector development.
Business Registration and Licensing will include outreach to women business owners to increase the
number of women entering formality. Greater clarity in land ownership and access rights has the
potential to increase women’s access to collateral, an important stepping stone for business
development and support to entrepreneurship. Given the predominance of women in subsistence
agriculture activities, interventions designed to increase the productivity of agriculture will ensure
higher incomes for women in this sector. The WBG will also work to amplify women’s voices in the
policy sphere. In this regard, access to high-quality data is essential, and the WBG will conduct a
gender-sensitive public expenditure review and ensure gender disaggregation of data. Given
persistently high rates of domestic violence, the World Bank will also partner with the government
on a National Gender Workshop, which will facilitate broad consultations on domestic violence,

15

Unofficial numbers, derived from donor reported figures on the government Transparency Portal. Not all donors
have reported ODA.

13

women’s engagement in the private sector, and other priority national gender concerns, to help focus
and coordinate resources across many stakeholders. 16
34.
The WBG will assist the GoTL to prepare for climate and disaster risks. The Bank is
helping the government to incorporate climate resilience into infrastructure design, and the roads
program will include a component on disaster risk management. Because non-irrigated agriculture
(such as corn and tubers) is particularly prone to droughts, WBG programs will support agriculture
systems that can help poor farmers cope with these effects. Policy work on social protection will
improve the system for addressing the vulnerabilities of the very poor, many of whom are vulnerable
to weather-related shocks.
35.
The WBG will ramp up staffing and “face time” in its areas of support. The standard
World Bank staffing model is not appropriate to a fragile country with the capacity weaknesses of
Timor-Leste. The country team needs capable staff on the ground with global experience to engage
with the client in ensuring learning and full ownership of analytical work and on all aspects of
implementation. A portfolio review makes clear that the best-performing programs were those that
were supervised by an experienced staff member in the field or with considerable “face time”. The
proposed trust funds will finance international staff in the field in critical areas.
B. INSTRUMENTS
36.
Timor-Leste’s per-capita gross national income (GNI) is in excess of US$3,000, and it
has been declared creditworthy to borrow from the IBRD, facilitating the country’s graduation
from IDA to Blend eligibility status. The transition to Blend status reflects Timor-Leste’s strong
fiscal performance and development progress. In this CPS period, Timor-Leste can access IDA
credits and IBRD financing. 17 The Bank will encourage a tailoring of IDA and IBRD assistance
volumes to help achieve a smooth eventual transition to IBRD-only status and the efficient use of
other financing resources. Given the risks associated with managing public debt, the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund (IMF) will provide continued support to the government in this area.
Timor-Leste’s first loans, from ADB and Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), were
approved in 2012. The CPS assumes an indicative IDA envelope of US$25 million each for IDA16
and IDA17, for a total of US$50 million18 and an indicative IBRD envelope of US$54-60 million,
subject to country performance, IBRD’s lending capacity, demand by other Bank borrowers, and
global economic developments. In addition, the Bank will work with the authorities to fully explore
the flexibility in IDA financing, including the potential use of the Immediate Response Mechanism19
and the Crisis Response Window that could support the government’s rapid response to eligible crisis
and emergency situations, as well as the potential access to the IDA regional program that could
provide additional resource for participating in regional integration operations. Initially a
16

For more on the gender context in Timor-Leste, please see Attachment 3.
Because Timor-Leste has not begun borrowing from IBRD of the World Bank, the Bank has not included an
analysis of Key Exposure Indicators in this CPS. However, they will be added during the CPS Progress Report.
18
The estimate of the IDA envelope is based on the available IDA16 resources, and it is updated annually. The
IDA16 envelope includes firm FY12-13 allocations and indicative FY14 allocations, and the IDA17 envelope
(FY15-17) is only an indicative estimate. The final allocation may vary due to: (i) total IDA resources available over
the CPS period; (b) the country’s performance rating, GNI per capita, and population; (iii) the performance other
allocation parameters, and IDA assistance terms for other IDA borrowers; and (iv) the number of IDA-eligible
countries. Also, IDA allocations are provided in SDR terms; while the US dollar equivalent amount is provided at
the IDA16 replenishment exchange rate of US$1.50233/SDR, the exchange rate for each operation depends on the
applicable prevailing rate at the time of approval.
19
This mechanism allows the inclusion of emergency related contingent components in selected investment
operations to support rapid response in eligible crisis and emergency situations when needed.
17

14

combination of an IDA credit and an IBRD loan totaling US$40 million will finance an investment in
roads. The remaining IBRD resources are being considered for investments to be chosen from the
following areas: branch roads, port facilities, airport upgrading, telecommunications, agriculture, and
education. These are likely to develop in outer CPS years, and will be included in the CPS Progress
Report. Instruments could include Investment Loans (SILs), Program-for-Results (P4R) financing, or
budget support.
37.
Although WBG financing is small relative to budget and needs, the government sees
various benefits in borrowing. At US$15-$25 million, the expected amount of IDA/IBRD loan
disbursements is small relative to government budget (in excess of US$1 billion). Nevertheless, the
government views borrowing from the WBG and others as an important component of budget gap
financing. First, borrowing would permit the government to reduce withdrawals from the PF while
the costs of the loans are less than the expected PF returns (currently averaging 4% per annum).
Second, the government wishes to become familiar with and develop the capacity to manage debt.
Finally, the government values the considerable technical assistance and implementation knowledge
that comes embedded in WBG loans, and therefore wishes to use WBG loans to leverage sizeable
portions of government investments. For example, the proposed credit and loan of US$40 million for
a road rehabilitation project could be accompanied by US$52 million of government financing, using
WBG procurement methods and safeguard policies. The government values in particular the WBG
global capacity to foster South-South knowledge exchanges both with fragile and non-fragile states.
The WBG is already supporting some of these activities and South-South learning will be expanded
considerable during the CPS period, both in lending and in analytical support.
38.
In the CPS period, the WBG will utilize the full suite of WBG financial products,
including lending, recipient- and Bank-executed TFs, IFC investment and advisory services,
and technical assistance) to support Timor-Leste’s development path. For the first CPS years, the
government intends to restrict borrowing to transport infrastructure investments. Financing
instruments to support non-infrastructure activities will consist primarily of Bank- and recipientexecuted trust funds, including a planned AusAID-World Bank multisector trust fund, a European
Union trust fund for public financial management, and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) for agriculture. (Attachment 4 provides an
overview of trust funds active in Timor-Leste.) TFs are an important feature of Timor-Leste’s
portfolio, funding critical technical assistance, analytical work, project preparation, supervision, and
implementation support, and partially funding five staff positions in the Dili office. They are
integrated into the portfolio and encourage cooperation with key development partners. During the
CPS period, the WBG will make less use of recipient-executed TFs, as donor financing diminishes or
is transferred directly to the government, it will, however, continue to rely on smaller Bank-executed
TFs that are better suited to mobilize global WBG experience.
39.
The IFC will facilitate the country’s first robust PPP transaction in Timor-Leste during
the CPS period, in addition to continuing to provide other Advisory Services. It will support the
government’s initiatives improving the business environment, addressing in particular access to
finance and barriers to entrepreneurship and business entry. PPPs will encourage a private sector role
in developing Timor-Leste’s core infrastructure and the World Bank will complement IFC’s role by
working with the government to improve its capacity to design and manage PPPs and other forms of
infrastructure financing.

15

C. STRATEGIC AREAS AND RESULTS
40.
The FY2013-17 CPS program will be structured around the three strategic areas and
one crosscutting theme of the SDP, and the program of the Fifth Constitutional Government.
The CPS will also address key stressors identified in the Fragility Assessment. The three
strategic areas are: (i) improving the management and delivery of services in education, health and
nutrition, and social protection (Social Capital pillar in the SDP); (ii) building core infrastructure to
connect communities to markets; and (iii) supporting economic development for a non-oil economy.
Work in these areas will be underpinned by a cross-cutting focus on (iv) strengthening institutions
for quality of spending and inclusive service delivery. The WBG will emphasize selectivity within
these four engagement areas, focusing on a small number of discrete, high impact projects as
described in Table 1.
Table 1: Indicative New IDA, IBRD, IFC Financing, Trust Funds, Global Partnerships, AAA,
and IFC Advisory Services (FY13-14) 20
Service
Delivery

Road Climate
Resilience Project AF
(FY13-14)

WBG RecipientExecuted
Operations
(IBRD/IDA, IFC
Financing, & TF cofinancing )
Recipient-Executed
Operations (TFs &
Global
Partnerships)
AAA & IFC Advisory Services

Infrastructure

PPPs in Infrastructure
(IFC, FY14)

Education
quality
improvement
(FY15)

Investment in Business
Infrastructure
(IFC, FY14-15)
Telecommunications
& ICT Development
(TBD)

Skills
development/
labor markets
(FY15)
Food &
nutrition
security &
agriculture
policy (FY14)

PPP policies &
capacity building
(IFC/WBI, FY14-15)

Economic
Development
Coffee & cash
crop rehabilitation
(FY15)
Investments
targeting 2
projects (IFC,
FY14-17)
Food/nutrition
security &
agriculture
productivity
(FY14)

Business process
simplification
(IFC, FY14)
Financial services
& banking sector
review (IFC,
FY14)

Health equity &
financial
protection
(FY14)
Health
financing PER
(FY15)

Institutions

Pacific Microfinance
Initiative (IFC, FY15)
Land policy & land titling
(FY15)

Country Gender Assessment
(FY14)
Community Driven
Development M&E (FY14)
Building disaster/climate
resilience (FY14)
Poverty analysis, PERs, &
Public investment
management (FY14-17)
Capacity building for PPPs
& infrastructure financing
(FY15)

20

This list includes only new planned activities; the fiscal year listed is an estimated start date for the activity, but is
subject to change. Activities are listed under the main CPS strategic area, but many touch on multiple strategic areas.
All activities are subject to change. Activities in the IDA17 period will be further defined during the CPS Progress
Report in FY15.

16

Strategic Area 1: Improving the Management and Delivery of Services in Education, Health and
Nutrition, and Social Protection
41.
The first CPS strategic area will build the capacity of the government to deliver services
to create an educated, healthy, employable and less vulnerable population. In particular, the
WBG will focus on supporting decentralized service delivery in health and education, and improving
the targeting and impact of social protection programs.
Engagement Area 1.1: Increasing access to and quality of education and health.
42.
The WBG will focus on technical assistance to improve the efficiency and quality of
service provision in education, skills development, and health, and contribute to a higher order
goal of creating an employable youth. The WBG will directly support implementation of the new
National Health Sector Strategic Plan (NHSSP) and National Education Strategic Plan (NESP),
analyze deficiencies in nutritional outcomes, and (in outer years) expand collaboration in the areas of
teacher quality improvement and workforce development. In the Ministry of Health, technical
assistance will strengthen a sector-wide monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system to assess the
health sector’s achievements against the NHSSP and evidence-based decision-making. The WBG
will also support the MOH to analyze health equity and financial protection. Education will be
enhanced through management strengthening and school facility improvements. The WBG will also
support the Ministries of Health and Education with district level budgeting and planning, and to link
line ministry annual plans and budgets to the national strategic policies.
Engagement Area 1.2: Developing an appropriate social protection system.
43.
Through the Social Protection Administration Project and related TA, the WBG will
continue to assist the government to improve the design, management, and evaluation of its
core social protection programs. Assistance includes development and deployment of a
Management Information System (MIS) for cash transfers; capacity building and training; and
technical assistance on M&E and database management. Upon request, the WBG will also advise the
government on methods to improve the impact of its programs, including poverty targeting, and on
the design and financing of its social insurance scheme for civil servants and the formal sector.
Strategic Area 2: Building Core Infrastructure to Connect Communities to Markets
44.
The second CPS strategic area will develop core infrastructure to enhance access to
services, employment, and markets, and to facilitate efficient and reduced-cost movement of
people and goods. Insufficient or poor quality infrastructure is an important constraint to private
sector growth and improved connectivity will help to enable economic diversification. Support in this
area will be delivered through a close partnership between the IBRD and IFC, will include lending,
technical assistance, and IFC investment and advisory services, and will set the stage for PPPs for
major infrastructure.
Engagement Area 2.1: Developing a high-quality, well-maintained road infrastructure.
45.
Through the Timor-Leste Road Climate Resilience Project, the WBG will support
Timor-Leste with climate-resilient road infrastructure on the Dili-Aileu-Maubisse-Ainaro
corridor, including branch roads to Gleno, Same, and Ramelau. This corridor transects key
agricultural and tourism development areas in Timor-Leste’s most populous region, where many of
17

its poorer populations live. This road network is a centerpiece of the SDP, and is expected to reduce
the transaction costs of market access, in particular for agriculture, improve access to one of the
priority areas targeted for tourism, and increase the accessibility of social services, particularly in the
rainy season. The road network is also a crucial connection between the north and south and will
facilitate access to the new Tibar Port, which will replace the Dili Port (see Engagement Area 2.2). It
will also facilitate an emergency response to tackle natural disasters. Finally, it is intended to serve as
a demonstration of effective climate-responsive road infrastructure.
Engagement Area 2.2: Commencing freight and air traffic improvement.
46.
The WBG, led by the IFC, will advise the government of Timor-Leste on the structure
and implementation of a transaction to enable private sector participation in the Dili Airport
expansion and greenfield port at Tibar Bay. This advice will consist of: (i) due diligence and
structuring, including advice on technical, legal, environmental, and social due diligence and design
of potential legal structures for a PPP; and (ii) implementation of a transparent and competitive
tender for a private airport operator. By the end of the CPS period, both projects will achieve
financial closure, facilitating private investment to improve and maintain infrastructure. Improved
trade logistics will help reduce the cost of imports, and in particular of food, reducing inflation
pressures. This CPS Outcome will link to Engagement Area 2.1, as the road network being
rehabilitated by the WBG links these facilities. The government has also expressed interest in WBG
co-financing the public investment component of the project; this is an important opportunity for
IBRD-IFC partnership to improve the private sector enabling environment.
Engagement Area 2.3: Supporting reliable and affordable telecommunications services through
efficient and well-regulated competition.
47.
WBG assistance will support the development and implementation of a new
telecommunications regulatory framework and Information and Communications Technology
(ICT) policy, and contribute to institutional development of the newly created ICT regulator.
These efforts build on the success of WBG assistance on a competition friendly telecommunications
policy and negotiations for the termination of the telecommunications monopoly, leading to the
issuance of two new operator licenses in a previously closed market and the establishment of a new
regulatory body. In the outer years of the CPS, the WBG may support the government’s catalytic
investments in fiber-optic infrastructure, including an international submarine cable. Technical
assistance and investment in the telecommunications sector is expected to contribute, both directly
and indirectly, to improved market access, productivity, and job creation.
Strategic Area 3: Supporting Economic Development for a Non-Oil Economy
48.
The third CPS strategic area will assist Timor-Leste to build the foundations for a nonoil economy that can eradicate poverty, create jobs, and improve livelihoods. It will emphasize
development of a productive agriculture sector, and support to private investment and reduced
transaction costs for business, including for tourism. Interventions on the ground will focus on
districts crossed by the road corridor to maximize the economic impact of the road and to
demonstrate a more integrated path for rural development. IFC will lead WBG engagement with
SMEs to identify opportunities for downstream development pending an agreement by Government
and developers of the Sunrise field.

18

Engagement Area 3.1: Increasing productivity of the agriculture sector through strategic
policy support and investments.
49.
Through the Food and Nutrition Security and Agriculture Policy TA and Project21, the
WBG will help address the low yields in food crops and the under-development of markets for
domestic food production. Specifically, it will support: (i) participatory resource planning and
development; (ii) investments in market and rural productive infrastructure; and (iii) use of targeted
learning grants to farmer organizations to improve farm practices. Raising productivity of food crops
to regional standards will help not only to improve rural incomes, but will also lead to lower food
prices, thereby facilitating access to food at the national level. Given the strong representation of
women in subsistence agriculture, increasing agricultural productivity will have a clear impact on
women’s economic opportunities. Similarly, the WBG will explore opportunities for the sustainable
development of ocean and in-land fisheries, an important natural resource that remains until now
untapped and unmanaged. The WBG will also assist the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF)
to implement its new strategic plan and will offer support in organizational development, strategic,
policy and investment planning capacity, and decentralization of its technical functions at the district
level.
Engagement Area 3.2: Improving the business environment.
50.
The WBG will assist the government in addressing key constraints to private sector
investment (including weak legal protections, complex and costly regulations, and skill
mismatch), primarily through partnership with financial institutions, support to private sector
institutions, technical advice on business regulatory reform, customs clearance, and PPP
policies support on land policy, and establishment of the nascent One Stop Shop for business.
Activities in this area will specifically address constraints to women’s participation in private sector
enterprises, including regulatory and process reforms to simplify business registration and
formalization. The private sector will be particularly important to drive tourism development, a
priority in the SDP, and the IFC will explore potential transactions with tourism operators. Already
the WBG is helping government identify areas with tourism potential along the road corridor. The
IFC will lead efforts by the WBG to strengthen the government’s capacity to design and manage
PPPs and will identify areas for IBRD engagement in PPP regulation and policy as well as
infrastructure financing, an important stepping stone for increasing private sector engagement in
infrastructure provision. To help address the constraints posed to private sector development by
insecure land ownership and usage rights, particularly for women, the WBG will respond to a request
by the Ministry of Justice for capacity building support in the areas of land policy and land
administration. Interventions in this area are also expected to mitigate the risk of land-related
conflict. Should there be demand from the government, the WBG will also provide assistance on
minimum wage policy, employment skills, and training, building on the findings of a recent Labor
Market Issues Diagnostic Report.
51.
IFC will partner with three financial institutions, including two microfinance
institutions, to double access to finance, particularly for women entrepreneurs. The WBG, led
by the IFC, will partner to conduct a review of the financial services and banking sector. Based on
these findings and government demand, the WBG will assist the government to improve financial
infrastructure through a credit registry or support to payment system development and develop an
approach to address gaps in SME financing.
21

The program team is currently seeking GAFSP funding; however, in the absence of this funding, the program will
go forward with support from WBG resources.

19

Cross-Cutting Theme: Strengthening Institutions for Quality of Spending
52.
The cross-cutting theme will focus on strengthening institutions to improve the quality
of spending, both across government and in the specific sectors addressed by this CPS. All
activities in the CPS will contribute, directly or indirectly, to improving the quality of spending of
government ministries. The WBG will also focus on planning and budgeting and enhancing resource
flows between Dili and the districts. Through improvements in institutional capacity, the WBG will
support the government to efficiently execute its substantial capital investment, improve the quality
of planning through better use of data, and strengthen systems to prepare for budget support in
subsequent CPS periods.
Engagement Area 4.1: Supporting public sector institutions and planning functions to
contribute to better economic management.
53.
The WBG will continue its focus on cross-sector public financial management,
macroeconomic stability, and budget execution through the Planning and Financial
Management Capacity Building Program. This will be supplemented by substantial support to the
government to improve public financial management and funds flow at the sector level as a means to
strengthen service delivery. PERs will be undertaken in several sectors, including health,
infrastructure, and gender. The WBG will support sector strategies in key sectors where they are
currently absent (for example, social protection).
54.
The WBG will continue to support the collection and analysis of data on living
standards through household income and expenditure surveys, poverty assessments, and other
household level living standards survey instruments. A CGAP will be developed based on a
gender assessment. These data will be made widely available and used to inform planning and policy
dialogue. The WBG will also support program- and sector-level data collection, including impact
evaluations and M&E systems. Consistent with commitments under the New Deal for Engagement
with Fragile States, the WBG will work to improve and use country systems, and to ensure that all
aid is on budget and reported through the government’s Aid Management System. A country systems
review, conducted in partnership with procurement and financial management teams with expertise
in fragile states, will identify barriers to further use of country systems and present a plan to address
these areas during the CPS period.
Engagement Area 4.2: Increasing the focus on equity, inclusion, and citizen participation.
55.
The WBG will deliver a series of analytical products highlighting issues of equality and
inclusion, including a study on socioeconomic inequalities, a human opportunity index, a
gender study, and a possible youth report. For example, analysis of the development benefits of
infrastructure spending will facilitate more effective, equitable, and sustainable development
outcomes for poor people and reduce grievances around infrastructure development. Findings will
inform the World Bank’s program design and will be disseminated to government through short,
digestible policy notes, and workshops. The WBG will also use ongoing analysis of the distribution
of benefits from infrastructure projects and social transfers to build a dialogue with the government
about equity and transparency in service delivery. For infrastructure specifically, the WBG will work
with civil society and the government to increase the voice of poor and vulnerable groups in
decision-making around spending. The WBG will partner with AusAid to assist with South-South
knowledge transfer and design of a M&E system for a large Community Driven Development
program financed by the government.
20

V.

RESULTS AND RISKS

A. RESULTS FOCUS
56.
The WBG will consistently monitor progress toward CPS Engagement Areas and link
results to the outcome and output indicators of activities in the portfolio. The results matrix
identifies several outcomes that are directly and measurably linked to the CPS Engagement Areas,
and can be reasonably expected to be achieved within the CPS period. The WBG will implement the
new RIM Sys results monitoring program, which links all portfolio activities to CPS outcomes and
allows consistent and streamlined tracking of progress. In recognition of risks in the operating
environment activities in the outer years of the CPS remain unspecified and are not reflected in the
results matrix. The CPS Progress Report in FY2015 will analyze progress, reconsider interventions
and results, and define activities for the latter CPS years.
B. MANAGING RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
57.
Timor-Leste is a young, post-conflict country facing significant developmental and
institutional challenges (Table 2). Risks include, inter alia, climate change, political or social
instability, policy and governance gaps, and implementation risks due to the low capacity
environment. Macroeconomic risks are also substantial. Economic prospects over the medium term
depend heavily on prudent and effective management of the Petroleum Fund and associated fiscal
policies. Risks include vulnerability of the economy to volatile oil prices, the risks to economic
stability and sustainable growth from inefficient or excessive withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund
in excess of absorptive capacity, and governance concerns, including political risks associated with
the evolution of political and government institutions and social tensions. The WBG categorizes risks
broadly as project-related risks that can be mitigated through project design and safeguards; countrylevel risks that the WBG can help to mitigate through selection of intervention areas, project design,
objective advice on policies and programs, and engagement with stakeholders; and risks that are
beyond the WBG’s span of influence. Flexibility is the core risk management strategy built into the
CPS.
58.
The WBG will actively monitor risks and changes in the operating environment, and
will adjust its mitigation strategy accordingly. In cooperation with the country office team and the
Justice for the Poor program, and with substantial input from the government’s Fragility Assessment
team, the World Bank’s Center for Conflict, Security, and Development (CCSD) conducted a desk
review of the major drivers of fragility based on the 2011 WDR framework in September 2012. The
findings from this review have informed the CPS and identified areas where additional analytical
work is necessary to understand economic, political, and social drivers of instability. The WBG has
worked closely with the government on the Fragility Assessment and will use its findings to inform
its dialogue with the government and program design going forward. Table 2 summarizes the risks
and mitigation strategies for country level risks as well as programmatic and institutional risks.

21

Table 2: Risks and Mitigation Strategies
Risk Description

Mitigation Strategy

Country-Level Risks
Timor-Leste reverts to conflict The WBG would prepare for the suspension of operations in
after failing to manage its
Timor-Leste and consider the evacuation of staff.
upcoming generational
leadership transition
Political conflict and/or
Programs will be designed with the flexibility to respond, or
instability hampers access to
restructure, as the operating environment requires. The WBG will
commission ongoing analytical work and work in close
senior civil servants and
cooperation with the CCSD team to keep abreast of potential
project sites, impedes
conflict triggers in the operating environment.
achievement of development
objectives, or reverses policy
gains
Elite bargains, patterns of
The CPS cross-cutting focus on quality of spending, investments
wealth distribution, unmet
in social service delivery and agriculture, and a geographic focus
expectations, perceptions of
on a region with a high proportion of poor people, are intended to
corruption, and entrenched
increase the share, quality, and impact of spending reaching
impoverished communities. Dialogue with the government on
poverty lead to instability
(particularly among frustrated infrastructure and cash transfer spending, as well as planned
public expenditure reviews, will continue to inform the
youth)
government’s planning and budgeting.
Legal and policy uncertainty
In addition to following required safeguards procedures for the
around land leads to increased Road Climate Resilience Project, the World Bank is conducting a
tensions between the state and study of cultural heritage sites along the road corridor to ensure
that the road does not impede access to or encroach upon any
communities, especially due
cultural sites. Should funding be secured, the WBG will also
to land expropriation or
work with the government and stakeholders to improve the legal
investor concessions
and policy environment on land.
Conflict between elements of
The WBG does not engage in the security sector. However,
the military and police forces
WBG’s Timor-Leste country team employs a full-time security
resurface following the
officer to keep abreast of potential security risks in the operating
withdrawal of UNPOL and the environment. The Australian government is supporting the
government to develop its community policing capacities to
International Stabilization
provide a supporting/ alternative security presence in
Force
communities throughout Timor-Leste.
Inflation, continued
The draft CPS focuses on quality of spending as a cross-cutting
overspending of the PF
theme. The WBG’s programs and technical assistance within the
Ministry of Finance, line ministries, and possibly the new
beyond a sustainable level,
corruption, or poor investment Economic and Policy Investment Advisory agency will focus on
transparency and efficient management of funds. The WBG’s
management cause wastage
Timor-Leste country team will also continue to rely on
and create economic and
political risks
substantial fiduciary and procurement guidance.

22

Risk Description
Mitigation Strategy
Programmatic and Institutional Risks
The government is unwilling
The WBG will continue to make use of diversified funding
to borrow for nonsources, such as bank budget and trust funds, including
multisector trust funds being developed in partnership with
infrastructure projects and
additional donor support is not AusAID and the EU. The WBG will also continue to urge
identified
increased human and infrastructure investments in social sectors.
Lack of ownership, poor
All projects will be reviewed for alignment with the CPS, which
coordination, and/or weak
has been discussed and agreed with the government and reflects
local capacity lead to projects overall government priorities and priority projects. Additionally,
individual projects will continue to be designed in cooperation
which are unsustainable
with civil servants and advisors within the respective Ministries;
and/or not appropriately
buy-in from the government will be a deciding factor during
modeled for the operating
project concept note reviews for new activities. In line with
environment
CASCR recommendations, projects will be designed simply, and
will be phased to ensure that the attention of civil servants is not
unduly spread across multiple objectives. On-the-ground support
from sector and fiduciary teams will also help to mitigate the
capacity risks.
Delays in the passage of key
The WBG will continue to monitor the legislative agenda and
legislation result in delays in
will make use of political economy analysis to determine the
likelihood of the passage of key legislation that impacts planned
project preparation or
implementation
or ongoing projects. However, there may be a need to delay or
restructure projects and CPS outcomes to account for changing
political priorities and legislative delays.
Procurement, financial, and
The WBG will engage additional financial management and
public financial management
procurement resources in Dili, both by hiring staff on the ground
systems continue to be
and through requests for support from the WBG’s Jakarta office.
inadequate to ensure effective The WBG will also work with the CCSD and regional
procurement and financial management teams to build country
project management, antisystems, and find ways to ensure good practice fiduciary
corruption, and budget
implementation
management in a low-capacity context.
Vested interests prevent
The WBG will work closely with leading government partners,
progress on key reforms.
civil society, and development partners to promote reforms. The
WBG’s focus on building institutional capacity and promoting
quality of spending will also help to mitigate this risk.
Lack of prioritization and poor The CPS quality of spending cross-cutting theme will address the
management threaten the
quality of program design, implementation, and management, in
addition to activities falling strictly within the areas of planning
sustainability of the
government’s portfolio of
and financial management.
programs
Timor-Leste is prone to
During the CPS period, technical assistance will be carried out on
frequent natural disasters, and managing disaster/climate risks on and around the Dili-Ainaro
the impacts of climate change road corridor, with a view to improving disaster/climate
are likely to lead to an
resilience of the transport assets and of livelihoods.
increase in the instance and
severity of natural disasters
23

Annex 1: Timor-Leste Country Partnership Strategy Results Matrix
MILESTONES 22
Indicative Bank Group
COUNTRY
CONSTRAINTS
OUTCOMES
the CPS will address
the CPS will influence
by which to measure
DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
progress
GOAL
STRATEGIC AREA 1: IMPROVING THE MANAGEMENT AND DELIVERY OF SERVICES IN EDUCATION, HEALTH AND
NUTRITION, AND SOCIAL PROTECTION
Engagement Area 1.1: Increasing access to and quality of education and health
Access to a quality
 Insufficient capacity of
SPN: Second Chance
 MOE capacity to
education enables
Ministry of Education
Education Project,
allocate resources to key
needs increased, as
people to participate
(MOE) for effective policy
Education Sector Support
measured by:
in the economic,
development and resource
Project (incl. AF and
social and political
management to ensure high
AFII), Education
development of the
quality education
 Pre-secondary GER from Management Strengthening
Indicator 1: Prenation (SDP, pg. 14)
74.3% to 80%
Project
secondary gross
enrollment rate (GER)
LEN: Education Quality
increased from 74.3%
Improvement Project, Food
(Census 2010) to 80% by
Security Project
2015.
ESW: Education service
delivery, education quality,
 GER disparity narrows
workforce development,
Indicator 2: Gender
from 5.8 percentage
teacher quality
disparity in secondary
points to under 4
improvement
education enrollment
percentage points
narrows from 5.8
percentage points to
under 4 percentage points
by 2015.
Timor-Leste will
 Declining trend in
SPN: National Health
 MOH resource
have a healthier
Government of Timor-Leste
management improved,
Sector Strategic Plan
population as a
(GoTL) health expenditure
as measured by:
Support Project
result of
as a % of general
LEN: Food Security
comprehensive,
government expenditures, in
Project
Indicator 1: # of districts
 Health MTEF prepared
high quality health
particular with insufficient
that receive recurrent
and updated based on
TA: JSDF on Food and
22

For results which are strongly linked to projects which end in or prior to FY15, and for which follow-on work has not yet been identified, outcomes and
milestones are identical. New outcomes will be incorporated into the CPS Progress Report, as necessary.

24

COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
GOAL
services accessible
to all Timorese
people (SDP, pg.
34)

CONSTRAINTS
the CPS will address
resources to maternal and
child health
 Insufficient capacity for
resource management,
including planning and
budgeting, implementation,
resource (human, financial,
and material) management,
and monitoring and
evaluation

OUTCOMES
the CPS will influence
expenditures consistent
with the NHSSP MidTerm Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) and
approved budget (Target:
8 in 2015; Baseline: No
MTEF yet developed)
Indicator 2: % of stockouts of tracer essential
drugs at health facilities
reduced (Target: 30% in
2015; Baseline: 40% in
2011)

Engagement Area 1.2: Developing an appropriate social protection system
Rights and interests  Lack of information needed
 Management and
of the most
for decision-making
implementation of social
vulnerable citizens
 Unsustainable levels of
assistance programs
improved, as measured
protected (SDP, pg.
growth in budget
by:
44)
 Lack of strategic
framework/policy
Indicator 1: Social
assistance policy
framework in place
Indicator 2: Program
management indicator
reports produced by the
MIS (Target: Quarterly in
FY15; Baseline: None in
FY13)

25

MILESTONES 22
by which to measure
progress
costed strategic plan

Indicative Bank Group
PROGRAM
Nutrition Security and
Agriculture Policy (TBC)

 % of stock-outs of tracer
essential drugs at the
Autonomous Service of
Medicines and Health
Equipment decreased
(Target: 15% in 2015;
Baseline: 19% in 2012)

 Interministerial
committee to consider
SA policy formed
 Management
Information System for
cash transfers developed
and deployed

SPN: Social Protection
Administration Project
TA: Social Protection
NLTA, indicative social
protection TA
ESW: PER on Social
Assistance, ongoing
analysis on social
protection and labor

MILESTONES 22
Indicative Bank Group
COUNTRY
CONSTRAINTS
OUTCOMES
the CPS will address
the CPS will influence
by which to measure
DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
progress
GOAL
STRATEGIC AREA 2: BUILDING CORE INFRASTRUCTURE TO CONNECT COMMUNITIES TO MARKETS
Engagement Area 2.1: Developing a high-quality, well-maintained road infrastructure
Extensive network
 Insufficient road network
LEN: Timor-Leste Road
 Improved road
of quality, wellincreases cost and time for
Climate Resilience Project
conditions and
maintained roads
travel
and Additional Financing I
sustainability of road
will connect
and II
 Low investment in
investment, as measured
communities,
operations and maintenance
by:
TA: Road for Cultural
promote rural
(O&M)
Heritage
development,
 Poor condition of roads in
Indicator 1: % of the Dili-  Road roughness reduced,
industry and
as measured by
key agricultural areas
Ainaro Road Corridor that
tourism, and provide  Little attention to climate
International Roughness
is in good or fair
access to markets
Index (IRI) (m/km)
change impact on road
condition (Target: 90% in
(SDP, pg. 70)
(Target: 3.5 for
networks
FY2016; Baseline:10% in
improved sections in
2012)
2016; Baseline: 9 in
2012) in the Dili-Ainaro
Road Corridor
 # of locations with
Indicator 2: Climate
improved slope
resilience of the Diliprotection on DiliAinaro road corridor, as
Ainaro road corridor
measured by % of
(Target: 25 in 2016;
drainage on the road
Baseline: 0 in 2012)
corridor in good condition
(Target: 90% in 2016;
 % of drainage on the
Baseline: 20% in 2012)
Road Corridor in good
condition (Target: 90%
in 2016; Baseline: 20%
in 2011)
Engagement Area 2.2: Commencing freight and air traffic improvement
International airport
 Lack of sector planning
 Air transport
expanded and
 Insufficient airport facilities
infrastructure
network of district
 Limited private sector
improved through
26

IFC AS: Dili Airport
IFC IS

COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
GOAL
airports built up to
meet future demand
for air traffic and
boost key industry
sectors (SDP, pg.
222)

New seaports
support growing
economy and meet
future industry and
freight demands
(SDP, pg. 222)

CONSTRAINTS
the CPS will address
investment

 Limited private sector
investment
 Lack of sufficient freight
facilities

OUTCOMES
the CPS will influence

MILESTONES 22
by which to measure
progress

Indicative Bank Group
PROGRAM

private sector
investment, as measured
by:
Indicator 1: Dili Airport
construction complete

 Advice provided on
technical, legal,
environmental, and
social due diligence and
design of potential legal
structures for PPP

Indicator 2: US$5
million in new private
investment facilitated for
construction of Dili
Airport

 Competitive tender to
select private developer/
investor/operator to
partner with the GoTL to
build a new Dili Airport
initiated

 Seaport infrastructure
improved through
private sector
investment, as measured
by:

IFC AS: Tibar Bay Port
(Dili)

Indicator 1: US$50-70
 Competitive tender to
million in new private
select private developer/
investment for the Tibar
investor/operator to
Bay Port facilitated and
partner with the GoTL to
port construction
build Tibar Bay Port
underway
initiated
Engagement Area 2.3: Supporting reliable and affordable telecommunications services through efficient and well-regulated competition
Modern
 Legal and regulatory
 Information and
LEN or Programmatic
telecommunications
frameworks incomplete
communications
AAA + RETF:
network established
 Limited
Telecommunications and
technology (ICT)
27

COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
GOAL
(SDP, pg. 100)

CONSTRAINTS
the CPS will address
telecommunications
infrastructure, particularly
in rural areas, leading to
low access and high costs

OUTCOMES
the CPS will influence

MILESTONES 22
by which to measure
progress

ICT Development Project

policymaking
capability improved, as
measured by:
Indicator 1: Sector
policy documents
updated and effective
regulatory framework in
place

Indicative Bank Group
PROGRAM

 Initial review/update of
Telecommunications
Policy undertaken

 Penetration of
telecommunications
increased, as measured
by:
 Policy needs assessment
of broadcasting and
Internet delivery,
national Internet
exchange, international
optical fiber cables
completed
STRATEGIC AREA 3: SUPPORTING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR A NON-OIL ECONOMY
Engagement Area 3.1: Increasing productivity of the agriculture sector through strategic policy support and investments
Thriving
 Weak policy formulation
LEN: Agriculture
 Agricultural
agricultural sector
and implementation
Productivity Improvement
productivity and
reduces poverty,
capacity of the Ministry of
Project (APIP), Food
competitiveness
provides food
Agriculture and Fisheries
Security Project (see
improved, as measured
security, and
(MAF)
below), Marine Coastal and
by:
promotes growth in
Environmental
Limited use of commercial
rural areas and the
Management Project
inputs and improved
Indicator 1: % of
nation as a whole
(indicative), Coffee Sector
technologies by farmers
farmers adopting
(SDP, pg. 118)
Rehabilitation Project
 Under-developed market
improved farming
Indicator 1: # of direct
beneficiaries (Target:
80% of the population in
2017; Baseline: approx.
50% of the population in
2012)

28

COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
GOAL
Timor-Leste will
have at least four
niche cash crop
products that can be
consistently
exported (pg. 223)

CONSTRAINTS
the CPS will address
linkages due poor road and
marketing infrastructure
 Limited and erratic rainfall
and poor soil conditions
 Limited private sector
investment in agriculture
 Poor agricultural practices
among coffee farmers
 Soil degradation

OUTCOMES
the CPS will influence

MILESTONES 22
by which to measure
progress

practices (baselines and
targets will be identified
during project
preparation)
Indicator 2: % of
farmers adopting soil
and water conservation
measures (baselines and
targets will be identified
during project
preparation)
Indicator 3: One IFC
investment in coffee,
forestry, or another key
agribusiness subsector
initiated
 MAF policy
formulation and
planning, regulatory,
and implementation
capacity strengthened,
as measured by:
 Indicator 1: Timor-Leste
Research and
Development Institute
and Agricultural
Advisory Committee
established and
operational
29

 Coffee sector strategy
prepared in a
consultative manner

Indicative Bank Group
PROGRAM
TA: JSDF on Food and
Nutrition Security and
Agriculture Policy (TBC);
Institutional Development
Fund (IDF) on Capacity
Building in MAF; TA for
policy and planning
capacity building
ESW: Pre-feasibility study
for development of
groundwater irrigation,
Action Plan for the
Rehabilitation of the
Coffee Sector (WB and
IFC)
IFC AS: Pacific
Microfinance Initiative
(partnership w 2-3 MFIs)
IFC IS:
Coffee/agribusiness
investment

N.B. APIP could be
supported through GAFSP
if GoTL’s proposal is
accepted. In such case, the
 MAF is reorganized and Bank will appraise and
supervise project
adopts a decentralized
implementation.
structure

MILESTONES 22
COUNTRY
CONSTRAINTS
OUTCOMES
the CPS will address
the CPS will influence
by which to measure
DEVELOPMENT
progress
GOAL
Engagement Area 3.2: Improving the business environment.
Reforms to improve  Weak legal and regulatory
 Reduce the cost and
the business and
protections (including on
increase the ease of
investment
land ownership and use),
doing business in
environment in
complex and costly
Timor-Leste, as
Timor-Leste,
regulations, limited access to
measured by:
provide better
finance, skills mismatch
access to
 One Stop Shop
Indicator 1: Business
 High cost of business startmicrofinance, and
established, maintained
registration and licensing
up
create a new
and improved
process streamlined and
 Limited or no access to
National
time reduced (Target: 5
credit and long-term finance
Development Plan.
days; Baseline: 103
at affordable rates
(SDP, pg. 151)
days)
 Potential for conflict arising
from land expropriation and
 Either payment systems
Indicator 2: Access to
evictions
Businesses need
or credit registry created
finance is doubled
credit to invest,
(Target: 26% of the
expand, purchase
population in FY17,
goods and
Baseline: 13% of the
equipment, and
population in FY12)
upgrade facilities.
(SDP, pg. 152)
 Milestone will be
Indicator 3: # of women
determined in early 2013
with formalized
businesses increased
(Targets and baselines
will be determined in
early 2013)
 Contingent upon
passage of the draft
land law, land titling
underway in line with
law and approved land
policy
30

 Milestone will be
determined in early 2013

Indicative Bank Group
PROGRAM

TA: Labor Market Issues
Diagnostic Report, Land
policy and land titling
IFC AS: Public-Private
Dialogue, Business
Environment TA,
partnerships with financial
intermediaries, Business
Registration and Licensing
Reform, process
simplification, Financial
services and banking sector
review, IFC PMI
partnerships with 2-3
Financial Institutions; IFC
financial infrastructure
project.

MILESTONES 22
Indicative Bank Group
COUNTRY
CONSTRAINTS
OUTCOMES
the CPS will address
the CPS will influence
by which to measure
DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
progress
GOAL
CROSS-CUTTING THEME: STRENGTHENING INSTITUTIONS FOR QUALITY OF SPENDING
Engagement Area 4.1: Supporting public sector institutions and planning functions to contribute to better economic management
SDP implemented
 Insufficient attention to
SPN: National Health
 Improved efficiency
as cost effectively
sector planning, weak
Sector Strategic Plan
and targeting of public
and efficiently as
linkages between
Support Project, Education
expenditures, in line
possible (SDP, pg.
subnational program
Management Strengthening
with strategic priorities
227)
implementation and national
Project, Planning and
and sound fiscal policy,
planning
Financial Management
as measured by:
Capacity Building Program
Public sector
 Inadequate information for
 Gender-informed
management and
planning purposes
Indicator 1: Household
LEN: Education Quality
PERs in infrastructure Improvement Project,
governance
 Low level of cooperation,
and other survey data,
and at least 1
strengthened;
including data sharing,
poverty assessments, and
Food Security Project,
additional sector
Modern Information
within and among
program- and sector-level
Public Financial
 Poverty assessment
Technology will
government agencies
data made widely
Management (PFM) and
and/or HIES
have been adopted
 Insufficient attention by
available and used to
Economic Management
completed
by the civil service
donors to the needs of
inform program planning
TA: Public Investment
to support joined-up
fragile states, including lack
and policy dialogue (This  Disaster/climate
Management TA,
resilience study
government and eof harmonization of aid with
indicator will be
Petroleum Fund and Asset
undertaken
government
the local and national
sharpened during the
Management TA,
 Country Gender
initiatives (SDP, pg.
context, unpredictable aid,
CASPR.)
Agriculture Policy and
Assessment
227)
and inadequate attention to
Strategy TA, Social
undertaken
building capacity and
Protection and Pensions
systems
ESW: Infrastructure PER;
 At least 1 MinistryIndicator 2: At least 2
Youth public expenditure
level MIS developed
Ministry-level MIS
analysis; education service
and in use
developed and in use
delivery, quality and
(Baseline: 0 in 2012)
workforce development;
Poverty Analysis and
HIES; Building
Indicator 3: World Bank  Full and accurate data Disaster/Climate
Resilience; Country
support integrated into
on World Bank
Systems Review
and reported in budget
assistance made
plans and requests, and
available in GoTL Aid TF: Social Protection
31

COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
GOAL

CONSTRAINTS
the CPS will address

OUTCOMES
the CPS will influence
included in
appropriations approved
by Parliament

MILESTONES 22
by which to measure
progress
Transparency Portal
 Country systems
review undertaken

Indicator 4: PPP
regulation gaps identified
to allow transactions for
Dili Airport and Tibar
Bay Port
Engagement Area 4.2: Increasing the focus on equity, inclusion, and citizen participation
Timor-Leste will be  Lack of adequate
 Government policy and
a strong, cohesive
information for equality- and
programs informed by
and progressive
inclusion-focused policy
data on equality and
nation where the
planning
inclusion, as measured
rights and interests
 Rapid increase in
by:
of its most
infrastructure budget,
vulnerable citizens
 At least 2 analytical
executed through multiple
Indicator 1: Collection
are protected (SDP,
pieces on inequality
modalities, with incomplete
and use of data on
pg. 219)
(including gender and
monitoring of impacts
development and
age-based inequality)
 Limited voice and
inequality improved to
prepared and
participation of citizens and
support policy planning
disseminated widely
civil society in identifying,
(This indicator will be
planning and executing
sharpened during the
development priorities
CASPR.)
Indicator 2: National
systems and capacities
for maximizing
development benefits for
poor and vulnerable
groups improved,
increasing their voice and

32

 Analysis of equity in
infrastructure spending
completed and feeds into
reform of country
systems for
infrastructure planning

Indicative Bank Group
PROGRAM
Administration Project
IFC AS/WBI: PPP policy
support project

TA: Network for
Parliamentarians (with the
World Bank Institute
(WBI))
ESW: Poverty and Social
Impact Analysis (PSIA)
grant on Understanding
Perceived and Actual
Socio-Economic
Inequality, Poverty
Analysis and HIES, Human
Opportunity Index for
Timor-Leste, Youth PER,
Country Gender Analysis,
Public Investment
Management, sub-national
spending modalities, and
large infrastructure
contracts; Infrastructure
PER
ESW, LEN (IDA), and
TF: Social accountability
and transparency

COUNTRY
DEVELOPMENT
GOAL

CONSTRAINTS
the CPS will address

OUTCOMES
the CPS will influence
reducing grievances in
infrastructure
development

33

MILESTONES 22
by which to measure
progress
 Partnership with
stakeholders established
around a national-level
engagement on
infrastructure, with equal
participation of women

Indicative Bank Group
PROGRAM

Annex 2: Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
June 2012
Country Assistance Strategy for FY2006–2008 August 18, 2005
Interim Strategy Note for FY2010–2011
August 12, 2009
CASCR prepared by:
Under the guidance of:
With inputs from:

I.

Report No. 32700-TP
Report No. 50099-TP

Amanda Green
Luis F. Constantino
Pamela Dale
World Bank Timor-Leste Country Team

Introduction

1.
This Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report (CASCR) evaluates the World Bank’s
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste for the period
FY2006–2008, as well as the subsequent Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for FY2010–2011 produced
jointly by the World Bank and International Finance Corporation (IFC). To the extent possible, this
CASCR reports on progress to date, including for CAS outcomes that were envisioned over the
period FY2006–2008. A Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) was prepared but
never finalized, as the decision was taken to move to an ISN.
2.
The CAS for FY2006–2008 was the World Bank’s first full CAS for Timor-Leste, following
the Transition Support Strategy developed in 2000. Its chief aim was to help the country consolidate
early post-independence progress. In line with Timor-Leste’s National Development Plan and
Stability Program, the CAS was developed around three strategic pillars: delivering sustainable
services, creating productive employment, and strengthening governance. Youth and gender
considerations were mainstreamed throughout the program. Taking into account lessons learned from
the Bank’s early interventions in the country, the CAS emphasized four principles of engagement:
building institutional capacity, deepening the results orientation, strengthening transparency and
communication, and consolidating and extending strong international partnerships. The CAS
advocated a whole-of-government program supported by strong multidonor partnerships,
underpinned by the Consolidation Support Program (CSP), a budget support operation financed by
ten donor partners. Given its alignment with the multidonor CSP, the CAS results matrix included
outcomes to which the Bank did not expect to contribute directly. This CASCR reports only on those
outcomes to which the Bank expected to contribute directly. 23
3.
Less than a year after the start of the CAS, in April 2006, violence erupted in Timor-Leste.
Fighting broke out between the army and police following the dismissal of over one-third of the
army’s soldiers, which sparked widespread violence in the capital, Dili, particularly among youth
gangs. Over 100,000 people were displaced, and international troops were called in to restore order.
This period of insecurity lasted well into 2007, invalidating many of the assumptions underlying the
CAS and prompting the decision to move to an ISN. In May 2007, the Bank began processing new
operations under Operational Policy 8.00, Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies (OP 8.00). 24
23

These outcomes were marked with an asterisk (*) in the CAS Results Matrix. International Development
Association. 2005. Country Assistance Strategy for the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste for the Period FY06–
FY08. Report No. 32700-TP, June 22. Annex B9.
24
The most recent project in Timor-Leste approved under OP8.00 is the 2009 Youth Development Program.

34

4.
Published in August 2009, the ISN for FY2010–2011 aimed to support the government in
using its oil wealth to address immediate post-conflict stabilization imperatives while laying a sound
basis for sustained growth in nonoil sectors. Recognizing the critical role of private sector
development in ensuring national stability and nonoil growth, the ISN was prepared jointly by the
World Bank and IFC. The move to an ISN also reflected the understanding that the political and
security risks present at the time in Timor-Leste required greater focus and flexibility in the program.
CAS activities that were no longer relevant to the country’s context and goals were restructured or
dropped. This CASCR reports to the extent possible on progress made on all CAS activities.
5.
ISN activities were organized differently than those in the CAS, focusing on four strategic
stages of the government’s transition from restoring stability to fostering long-term development: (i)
participation in the ongoing dialogue on National Priorities and the formulation of a national
development strategy; (ii) development of capacity to implement this strategy; (iii) design and
implementation of short-term stabilization activities; and (iv) steps to secure longer-term economic
growth and development. Implementation of the ISN was guided by the Bank Group’s framework for
engagement in fragile states. 25
6.
Following a thorough review of CAS and ISN implementation, the country team has rated
both Program and Bank performance moderately unsatisfactory based on the latest guidelines for
CASCR ratings. 26 Though good progress was achieved toward most major outcomes—an impressive
feat in a new, postconflict country—the program did not meet expectations in key areas such as job
creation, agricultural development, and youth employment. Regarding the Bank Group’s
performance, while the design of the CAS provided the broad scope and coordinated multidonor
approach the government was looking for, the strategy’s ambitious targets foundered in the face of
severe capacity challenges and postconflict uncertainty. Despite improvements in program
supervision and meaningful dissemination of analytical work, implementation was hampered by
overly complex projects and insufficient mitigation of risks.
7.
This assessment is based on discussions within the country team and on a review of key
documents.27 The assessment is informed by the Independent Evaluation Group’s (IEG) Country
Program Evaluation (CPE), which reviewed 39 IDA- and IBRD-financed operations, four IFC
advisory service activities, and various trust funded activities implemented between 2000 and 2010.
However, in keeping with the CASCR guidelines, this assessment is a self-evaluation by country
office staff, and therefore may differ from the CPE in both its analysis and conclusions.
II.

Progress toward Longer-term National Development Goals

8.
In evaluating Timor-Leste’s progress toward the long-term development outcomes set forth
in the CAS, it is important to take into account the disruptive and, in some cases, retrogressive effects
of the 2006–2007 crisis. The outbreak of violence destabilized the political environment, contracted
the economy, and exacerbated unemployment, adding a significant burden to the challenges the
country already faced in meeting its national development goals. As discussed at length in the World
25

World Bank. 2005. Fragile States—Good Practice in Country Assistance Strategies (IDA/R2005-0252),
December.
26
World Bank. 2012. Guidance to Staff on the Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report. Operations Policy
and Country Services Department. October.
27
Key reference documents include the CAS for FY2006–2008, the ISN for FY2010-2011, Project Documents,
Implementation Status and Results Reports, supervision reports, Implementation Completion and Results Reports,
trust fund progress reports, portfolio reviews, and recent Economic and Sector Work.

35

Bank’s World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development, it is not unusual for
post-conflict countries to experience “cycles of repeated violence, weak governance, and instability,”
which frustrate efforts to reduce poverty, advance human and economic development, and improve
institutional performance. 28 Moreover, creating institutions that can break the cycle of violence takes
15 to 30 years, even in the most promising cases, and the transition to stability tends to take shape in
a series of transitions from confidence building to institutional transformation. 29
9.
In this context, it is notable that the young nation of Timor-Leste emerged from this crisis
intact and with a renewed focus on translating the work of government into tangible economic and
social benefits for its citizens. Despite the tense situation, the government showed impressive
restraint in its handling of the crisis. Under intense pressure to rebuild public trust, it moved quickly
to address the proximate cause of the unrest and to resettle those who had been displaced. In the
aftermath of the conflict, the government prioritized the promotion of economic recovery, provision
of security, implementation of social protection programs, and restoration of positive communication
with the Timorese people about government policies and initiatives.
10.
As a result of the government’s priority focus on stabilization and recovery, some activities
that had been highlighted in national development planning documents and, consequently, in the
CAS were deemphasized in the short term, with attendant effects on the achievement of these
objectives. Still, despite the challenging context, Timor-Leste has made important progress toward
recovering from the effects of the crisis and advancing toward national development goals. The
country’s first National Development Plan—in which the CAS was anchored—set forth two
overarching development objectives: (i) to reduce poverty across the nation; and (ii) to promote
equitable and sustainable economic growth.
11.
The incidence of poverty increased significantly between 2001 and 2007, a period of global
economic financial downturn. The Timor-Leste Survey of Living Standards (TLSLS) measured the
poverty headcount at 49.9 percent nationwide in 2007, up from 36.6 percent in 2001. 30 Poverty was
shown to be greater in rural areas, arising largely from a decline in average consumption. Preliminary
analysis in advance of a planned household survey and full poverty assessment suggests some
persistence in poverty..
12.
Timor-Leste’s economic recovery has been strong, showing average annual growth rates
above 10 percent since 2007. The government’s expansionary fiscal policy has been a principal
driver of this growth. This fiscal approach relies on the country’s petroleum income, which peaked at
US$ 2.8 billion in 2011 and is projected to come to an end by 2025. The country has amassed over
US$ 11 billion in savings (nearly eleven times the estimated nonoil GDP in 2011) in its Petroleum
Fund, which provides a cushion for potential economic shocks. Withdrawals from this Fund, which
were budgeted to exceed the estimated sustainable income (ESI) by US$ 321 million in 2011 and are
planned at over twice the ESI for 2012, have been aimed at spurring domestic investment and private
sector growth. While medium-term economic prospects are strong, they depend on the quality of
government spending and government efforts to stimulate economic opportunities across the country.
Moreover, the transition from low-income, postconflict environment into an oil-rich lower-middle-

28

World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development. Washington DC:
World Bank, pp. 2-5.
29
Ibid, pp. 10, 12.
30
World Bank. 2008. Timor-Leste: Poverty in a Young Nation. Preliminary Draft. Washington DC: World Bank.

36

income country will have important implications for its strategic development path as well as for the
nature of its relationship with the Bank.
13.
Though the ISN focused less on national long-term development goals than on short-term
stabilization, it did aim to help the government lay the foundations for sustained nonoil growth as
part of its transition out of a postconflict environment. It did so in two areas: support for enhanced
rural productivity and creating a basis for enhanced private sector activity.
14.
After a period of low growth from 2000-2007, agricultural sector growth rates reached 13.4
percent in 2008 and 12.6 percent in 2009. Yet nearly half of rural households live below the poverty
line of US$ 0.88 per day, and food security, poor nutrition, and child malnourishment remain
substantial challenges. Additional efforts are needed to reach vulnerable upland farmers and to
address the underlying causes of food insecurity, including low yields of staple crops, large postharvest losses, and limited food distribution capacity.
15.
Timor-Leste has a small but growing private sector, which has benefited from a substantial
increase in government spending since 2007. The business regulatory environment has improved,
including in telecommunications, microfinance, procurement, business registration, and customs
clearance. Despite this progress, the barriers to private sector growth remain substantial. Timor-Leste
ranks 169th out of 185 countries in the joint World Bank-IFC 2013 Doing Business survey, and poor
infrastructure, high transportation costs, and limited access to land and finance impede investment.
III.

Program Performance

16.
Overall performance on the CAS and ISN program is rated moderately unsatisfactory based
on the ratings scale provided in the CASCR guidelines. Good progress was achieved toward most
major expected outcomes—an accomplishment that is particularly remarkable in a postconflict, lowcapacity environment. Support provided under the CAS and ISN programs helped expand school
enrollment and improve health outcomes. The highly transparent and inclusive process of identifying
and recognizing veterans of the resistance helped promote national dialogue and healing after a long
history of conflict. On governance, the Bank’s role in helping Timor-Leste to develop institutions,
establish and strengthen financial management systems, and create a world-class petroleum revenue
management regime is widely acknowledged by the government and development partners.
17.
Nonetheless, the program fell short of goals in key areas such as job creation, agricultural
development, and meeting the needs of unemployed young people. Efforts to stimulate private sector
development and job growth have proceeded slowly in comparison to the country’s needs. Early
interventions were too piecemeal to make a meaningful impact, and more comprehensive approaches
have so far failed to take root. Support provided to agricultural development under the multidonor
CAS and, subsequently, to rural development under the ISN has had some effect, but there is a need
for broader, more systematic interventions and closer engagement with key players in the ministry.
Finally, despite an effort to mainstream youth concerns in the CAS, the design of the program failed
to mitigate the risk of youth dissatisfaction and violence that materialized during the crisis.
18.
The remainder of this section will briefly review program performance by CAS pillar and
ISN strategic area. In each of the areas supported by the CAS, Bank assistance was underpinned by
the multidonor CSP budget support operation; other key Bank interventions are highlighted in the
relevant sections below. Where there are intersections between the CAS and ISN programs, like

37

topics are discussed together, thus yielding an integrated discussion of progress over the two strategy
periods. Details are provided in the self-evaluation summary matrix (Annex 1).
Delivering Sustainable Services
19.
Increased access to and improved efficiency and quality of basic education (CAS). Access to
basic education has grown rapidly despite the crisis, with net enrollment reaching around 90 percent.
Between 2001 and 2007, literacy among those aged 15 to 24 swelled from 50 percent to 85 percent.
The CAS outcome targets on grade one enrollment and continuation to grade two were achieved with
relative parity among boys and girls. However, repetition and dropout rates remain high, and
educational quality is low. An Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) conducted in 2011 found
that 43 percent of children at the end of grade 2 were unable to read a single word. The scope for
overall improvement in early reading ability has been held back by the growth in primary school
enrollment, which has brought the poorest, most vulnerable children into the system. It is notable,
however, that Timor-Leste was one of the first low-income, capacity-constrained countries to
undertake the EGRA, and given continued distribution of learning materials and teacher training,
expectations are high that reading results will begin to improve. The education ministry is
undertaking major sector reform, shifting to school- and community-based management of school
clusters, but the sector continues to face systemic management and resource constraints.
20.
Improved access to and quality of primary health services (CAS). Timor-Leste’s relatively
strong health sector institutions responded well to the crisis, swiftly re-establishing service provision
and assisting those who had been displaced, and the country has continued to make good progress in
achieving many of its key health outcomes. Immunization coverage exceeded CAS outcome targets,
and moderate progress was made in increasing annual outpatient visits. Achievement of CAS targets
on skilled attendance at birth is unclear given discrepancies in available data sources. 31 Ensuring
adequate quality of health sector information represents a continuing challenge. Health promotion
efforts have gained some headway, particularly in reproductive health and communicable diseases,
and Timor-Leste has made important advancements in health sector management.
21.
Service delivery capacity in health and education sector programs (ISN). The Bank’s
interventions to support the government’s strategic planning, financial and information systems
development, and management of construction and service provision have assisted the government to
progressively improve its performance under the Health Sector Strategic Plan for 2008–2012. In the
education sector, there has been good progress in achieving outcomes set out in the Strategic Plan for
Achieving Universal Primary Completion by 2015. In addition, the Second Chance Education
Project, which became effective in 2011, aims to provide basic education certification and skills
training to young people who missed out on traditional education opportunities.
22.
Improved efficiency of power supply and collections in the national capital and enhanced
availability of reliable, affordable power in the districts (CAS). Following a recent extensive national
power development program, unofficial estimates suggest that the national electrification rate may
have risen to 80 percent in mid-2012. Installation of a new generator at Comoro has helped achieve
significant fuel cost savings and improve the reliability of the power supply in Dili. Distribution
system improvements have significantly reduced system losses, increased the number of paying
customers, and strengthened revenue collection. Key challenges in rural energy include expanding
31

According to the Health Management Information System (HMIS), the target of 40 percent was exceeded (46
percent), while under the 2009–2010 Demographic and Health Survey it was not (30 percent).

38

access to electricity and addressing the negative health and environmental effects of biomass fuels. A
distribution system was completed in Aliambata, but plans to build a seep gas-fired generation plant
were dropped following tests showing that gas resources in the project areas would be insufficient.
The government instead financed a diesel-fired power plant that backs up the electricity supply.
23.
Recognition of veterans of the resistance on the basis of national consultations (CAS).
Launched in 2002, the painstaking and participatory process of identifying and registering veterans
of the resistance had a tangible effect on national stability, generating public consensus around the
definitions of veterans and appropriate forms of government assistance. This process was highly
inclusive and well received, as evidenced by the absence of veterans’ issues from among the political
grievances articulated during the 2006–2007 crisis. 32 A veterans’ law was passed in 2006 and has
since been revised to adjust eligibility and benefit levels. The national dialogue culminated in a series
of recognition ceremonies held between November 2006 and May 2008. Pension payments to
veterans or survivors were launched in mid-2012.
24.
Sustaining an effective safety net for the most vulnerable (ISN). The government’s social
assistance framework expanded rapidly following the crisis, resulting in a formal safety net and
associated public expenditures that extend beyond those usually found in low-income countries. A
series of cash transfer programs was launched in 2007, including pensions for the elderly and
disabled and a conditional cash transfer program directed at female-headed poor households who
send their children to school and health clinics. Roughly one-tenth of the population is now receiving
some form of social support.
25.
Tackling youth employment and alienation (ISN). Though the CAS highlighted the risks
posed by Timor-Leste’s rapidly growing youth population in a context of high unemployment and
poor government communication about public sector development initiatives, the 2006–2007 crisis
brought this issue to the forefront. In designing the ISN, the Bank sought to tackle the needs of youth
more directly using a two-pronged approach: (i) building a national employment bridge to support
short-term income-earning opportunities, and (ii) empowering young people to participate
meaningfully in their country’s development through direct engagement and second-chance
education opportunities. During ISN implementation, however, the government requested that the
comprehensive National Workfare Program envisioned under the first element be dropped. On the
youth empowerment side, the Youth Development Project has provided funding to support local
development projects that are identified and implemented by youth groups in five districts. The
Second Chance Education Project is working to establish community learning centers and provide
education services for young people who have not benefited from the traditional school system.
26.
Promoting equitable access to “economic justice” (ISN). The Bank has worked to strengthen
participation in development planning and decision making among the rural poor, supporting
research, conflict mapping, and a community feedback system designed to deepen accountability in
local governance. The feedback system has not been taken on board by the government, however.
The program has also focused on improving government and private sector engagement with
communities. Some progress has been made in integrating effective conflict management and rights
protection considerations into development processes.

32

World Bank. 2008. Defining Heroes: Key Lessons from the Creation of Veterans Policy in Timor-Leste.
Washington DC: World Bank.

39

Creating Productive Employment
27.
Jobs created directly through budget implementation and overseas employment programs
(CAS). The number of jobs created through the nascent emigrant workers program fell far short of
expectations. Negotiations with recipient countries proved to be complex, preventing the program
from reaching its potential. There were some efforts early in the CAS period to direct routine road
maintenance budget expenditures toward labor-intensive activities, but these activities yielded few
jobs. Challenges included slow budget execution and limited capacity for works supervision.
Following the crisis, the ISN sought to implement a more comprehensive employment creation
program, but this effort was dropped at the government’s request (paragraph 25).
28.
Improved private sector enabling environment, resulting in increased trade, investment, and
jobs (CAS). Key elements of the legal framework supporting investment have been implemented,
and administrative procedures for credit are in place. Foreign direct investment and nonpetroleum
exports have grown substantially, exceeding CAS targets. Business registration processes have been
updated, and the time required to start a business fell from 92 days in Doing Business 2005 to 13
days as of March 2012. A One Stop Shop for business entry, set to open in April 2013, is expected to
further reduce the number of days and procedures required. There was some expansion of
entrepreneurial jobs, and government-business consultation has been enhanced, including through the
unification of 17 associations into the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Timor-Leste.
29.
Improved access to credit for private investment and working capital (CAS). Timor-Leste’s
ranking on “getting credit” jumped to 159th of 185 countries in the Doing Business 2013 survey, up
from 170th of 178 countries in Doing Business 2008. 33 A public Credit Registry Information System,
designed in consultation with banks and microfinance institutions, was launched in 2009.
Commercial bank lending and access to microcredit have grown, though no special initiatives have
been undertaken to reach young people.
30.
Creating a basis for enhanced private sector activity (ISN). The IFC supported the
establishment of a Chamber of Commerce and Industry, which has provided recommendations to the
government on private sector priorities such as access to financial services, trade facilitation, and
business registration, and has participated in discussions with the government and labor unions on the
minimum wage and labor law. The government approved a Public-Private Partnership Law in May
2012 and has signed transaction agreements with IFC to develop Tibar Port and Dili Airport.
31.
Enhanced sustainable resource management (CAS). There has been some progress in
outlining a legal and regulatory framework for the sustainable development of agriculture, forestry,
and fisheries, though implementation has been slow and difficult to assess. Enforcement,
implementation, and impact are still limited. The country’s first national park was created and other
protected areas identified, though these amount to only about 60 hectares of land. A fisheries
licensing system is under implementation, but monitoring is selective and control is limited.
32.
Building blocks for improved food security and food production in place (CAS). There has
been some recent progress on monitoring of and reporting on food security, but food production
statistics remain unreliable. Good progress has been made toward the release of new crop varieties,
and these improvements are expected to have a significant impact once sufficient seed and planting
33

The Doing Business methodology was adjusted in Doing Business 2012, so these rankings are not directly
comparable. But they give a general sense of Timor-Leste’s improvement in this area.

40

materials are available. A high-quality national agricultural extension strategy was developed, and
extension officers are now in place in nearly every village in the country. Their effectiveness is
constrained by limited resources, however.
33.
Enhanced business-oriented production of agricultural products (CAS). Coffee remains the
only high-value, organic cash crop in Timor-Leste. Annual coffee production and export earnings
have increased steadily, but important challenges remain in expanding the sector’s value added,
including high input costs, inconsistent quality due to aging trees and insufficient understanding of
quality problems among producers, lack of access to credit, and limited coordination among small
growers.
34.
Support for enhanced rural productivity (ISN). The ISN included support for policies and
programs to increase smallholder productivity, and the Bank’s guidance in the sector has begun to be
integrated into government strategy documents. Though the ISN left open the possibility of
launching a rural development operation, this did not materialize due to funding constraints. Recent
advances in rural development planning and implementation show the importance of maintaining a
long-term, generational view of support for agricultural and rural development.
Strengthening Governance
35.
Safeguards against corruption and abuse of power in place, with increased awareness of
citizens’ rights (CAS). Timor-Leste has made good progress in establishing institutions to safeguard
public sector accountability. The Office of the Provedor dos Direitos Humanos e da Justiça became
operational in 2006. It is no longer responsible for investigating corruption following the
establishment of an independent Anti-Corruption Commission in June 2009 and the appointment of a
vice prime minister with a mandate to address corruption. The effectiveness of both these institutions
has been constrained by limited resources. The independence and effectiveness of parliamentary
scrutiny has improved, though there is a continuing need to strengthen technical skills and
experience. The media and civil society are active on governance issues, publishing cases of alleged
corruption and fostering public discussion.
36.
Transparency and probity in managing petroleum revenues (supported by the CAS and
continued under the ISN). In 2008, the government launched the Timor-Leste Transparency Model to
help the public better understand the resource management process. In July 2010, Timor-Leste
became the third country to be deemed compliant with standards set under the global Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). In October 2010, the first Revenue Watch Index ranked
Timor-Leste 12th of 41 resource-rich countries on comprehensive revenue transparency. However,
some amendments to the Petroleum Fund Law have been enacted against technical advice, and
withdrawals from the petroleum fund have been above the ESI for the past three years.
37.
Enhanced motivation and responsibility among civil servants, resulting in higher standards
of probity and service delivery (CAS). The powers and mandate of the Office of the Inspector
General, including its role in internal audit, were defined through an organic law in 2009. Parliament
has approved the establishment of a Tribunal da Contas, which will conduct external audits. In 2009,
the government established an independent Civil Service Commission with a mandate to improve
service orientation, leadership, ethics, and career structure in the civil service, along with powers to
investigate misconduct and decide on disciplinary measures, but it faces this broad agenda with
limited capacity and financial resources. The government introduced a new career regime, though
this has been undermined somewhat by the recent proliferation of special regimes for line ministries.
41

38.
Sound policy and legislative process across government and strengthened capacity to
manage for and monitor results on the ground, with particular attention to women and youth (CAS).
The government produced a legislative program setting out a timetable for passage of legislation, but
the harmonization of organic laws is still pending. The capacity of the National Statistics Directorate
has improved significantly as a result of technical assistance and hands-on experience in
implementing key surveys, including—despite the disruptions caused by the crisis—a living
standards survey that would be considered of high quality by international standards.
39.
Improved implementation of budget in a transparent manner, in line with savings policy and
sustainable growth and poverty reduction goals (supported by the CAS and continued under the
public financial management outcome of the ISN). Timor-Leste has made solid progress in
strengthening the transparency and effectiveness of public financial management systems. The
budget document is comprehensive but does not accurately predict total budget spending given the
frequent use of significant supplementary budgets. Procurement capacity has improved, though there
is anecdotal evidence that less competitive procurement mechanisms are used more frequently than
in the past. A major reorganization of the Ministry of Finance (MOF) clarified roles and
responsibilities, promoted communication, and gradually strengthened management, but its relative
strengths are diminished by incomplete budget coverage, low capacity for budget planning and
implementation in line ministries, and the lack of internal and external audit.
40.
Enhanced revenue performance through streamlined procedures and mechanisms (supported
by the CAS and continued under the public financial management outcome of the ISN). Customs
collections have improved thanks to new cargo clearance arrangements, use of x-ray technologies,
and improved electronic systems. Petroleum tax receipts reached a record high in 2011 following the
launch of the government’s first comprehensive petroleum tax audit. Domestic revenue mobilization
remains weak, though a 2010 public awareness campaign strengthened the transparency of tax laws
and taxpayer obligations.
41.
Review capacity-building experience in Timor-Leste (ISN). Under the ISN, the Bank
anticipated conducting a review of capacity-building experience in oil-rich post-conflict societies to
identify approaches that could work in Timor-Leste and feed into a technical assistance and skills
development strategy. The Bank did conduct a review of capacity building in the MOF, but at the
government’s request, the ISN output was modified to a civil service review completed in 2011,
which recommended reforms to strengthen wage and salary bill management.
42.
Continued support for the National Priorities exercise (ISN). The Bank, along with the
United Nations, played a lead role in supporting the development and monitoring of high-priority,
government-identified initiatives known as the National Priorities (NPs) until 2011, after which the
government began to phase out the process in deference to its new Strategic Development Plan. The
government valued this support, as evidenced by its reference to the NPs process as best-practice
postconflict support to government-led and government-owned priority setting, but in practice, its
budget priorities appeared to be only marginally influenced by the exercise.
43.
Bringing international experience of postconflict transition to Timor-Leste: support for the
national strategic planning exercise and Bank Group policy work (ISN). Some assistance was
provided in the development of the government’s national strategic plan in the form of background
documents and costing support, but more formal engagement was not requested. Policy dialogue was
enhanced on trade integration, telecommunications liberalization, agricultural reform, and poverty
dynamics. The Bank has supported the government in bringing its own postconflict experience to the
42

world through the g7+ community of fragile and conflict-affected states, which is viewed
internationally as the most vocal and legitimate voice representing fragile states on the world stage.
IV.

World Bank Group Performance

44.
Overall Bank Group performance under the auspices of the CAS and ISN is rated moderately
unsatisfactory based on the ratings scale provided in the CASCR guidelines. 34 The CAS was
intentionally designed to be ambitious in order to meet the multifaceted development needs of a new
nation arising from conflict. The strategy’s focus on government ownership and donor coordination
was highly appreciated, but in the end its approach proved to be overly broad. Following the crisis,
the ISN sought to refocus the country program on stabilization and recovery efforts while putting in
place the building blocks for sustainable development in the medium to long term. In some sectors,
this effort to pare down to the essentials may have cut back too far, setting goals that were easily
reached. In others, the limited time horizon of the ISN allowed for minimal progress on thorny
agendas—especially as some large planned operations did not go forward. On the implementation
side, the country team made important progress in strengthening program supervision and making
analytical work more accessible, while continuing to play a valued role in donor coordination.
Nonetheless, many programs were not sufficiently small, simple, or flexible to ensure achievement of
outcomes or maintain good portfolio performance in a low-capacity environment. The CAS and ISN
identified several risks, some of which were realized, but no appropriate response to prevent or
mitigate these risks was taken.
Design and Relevance
45.
The CAS was closely aligned with government priorities as expressed in the National
Development Plan, Stability Program, and Sector Investment Programs. The selection of strategic
pillars and country-level objectives on which to focus was drawn from these documents, as well as
from the country’s Millennium Development Goals.
46.
The CAS was anchored by the multidonor CSP. In recognition of severe capacity challenges
faced by the nascent government in implementing its sweeping agenda, the CAS also envisioned the
implementation of targeted capacity development in the management of public finances through the
Planning and Financial Management Capacity Building Program (PFMCBP). These interventions
were supported by sector-specific operations in areas where the Bank had built up expertise through
implementation of the successful post-independence Trust Fund for East Timor. Together, these
instruments embodied an innovative business model for the Bank in Timor-Leste, building on the
government’s no-borrowing policy at the time to engage productively in coordinating international
partnerships, supported by trust fund resources, grants, and analytical and advisory activities.
47.
The CAS was drafted at a time when the government was taking on a new level of leadership
and focusing on programs designed to foster self-reliance, rather than directly on poverty reduction.
In this environment, the Bank team felt that its role was to support the government’s policies and
priorities while continuing to advocate for pro-poor interventions where appropriate. While
supporting the legitimate interest of a country that had recently regained its sovereignty, this design
34

This rating encompasses the activities of both the World Bank and IFC, where they apply. IFC launched
operations in Timor-Leste in August 2006, shortly after the start of the CAS. Though their involvement in its design
was limited, their early interventions were conducted in the context of the Bank’s CAS engagement as well as their
own independent strategy. Subsequently, the ISN was developed, implemented, and monitored jointly with IFC.

43

choice elicited a tension—common in fragile state environments 35—between cultivating country
ownership and focusing limited resources on a few priorities. In the end, the ambitious targets set by
the CAS may have diffused focus on the steps and sequencing needed to achieve tangible progress.
48.
Though the CAS covered a wide array of issues that were critical to Timor-Leste’s
development, the relevance of the strategy was tested during the 2006 crisis, during which many of
the risks identified in the CAS played out. As expressed in the ISN, the overarching lesson of the
CAS experience was that maintaining social stability requires paying close attention to underlying
tensions and communicating with citizens to manage expectations. Although the potential for a
resurgence of conflict was well understood, it did not adequately influence program design. A more
explicit focus on ensuring the distribution of tangible, short-term results might have helped stave off
the 2006 crisis. For example, the Bank identified youth as a flashpoint, but making it a “crosscutting” CAS theme in effect demoted the issue from direct attention. Only after the crisis did the
Bank carry out targeted analytical work on youth unemployment and enunciate a multisectoral youth
strategy, leading to operational interventions. Importantly, the ISN notes, this youth development
work was embedded in strong government leadership emanating from the lessons of the crisis.
49.
In the shift to an ISN, planned actions that were no longer deemed relevant were redesigned,
postponed, or dropped, and the thrust of continuing programs was adjusted to emphasize short-term
stabilization and continuous dialogue. For example, the PFMCBP refocused its efforts on
accelerating government spending without losing fiduciary control. The sectorwide approaches in
education and health concentrated on maintaining and/or restoring basic service provision, especially
in rural areas, and the new Youth Development Project aimed to foster inclusion and empowerment
among unemployed young people. Finally, the Bank joined other donors in supporting the
government’s NPs to help the government prioritize and manage its stabilization and recovery
objectives. Based on the Bank’s experience in fragile states, the ISN was geared toward ensuring a
flexible program to allow for timely responses to quickly evolving challenges.
50.
The design of the ISN reflected the lessons learned under the CAS by emphasizing
selectivity, simplicity of project design, and accessibility of analytical and advisory work. In some
sectors, this shift yielded a stronger, better-targeted program. On public financial management, for
example, a renewed focus on key functions and critical capacity needs under a restructured PFMCBP
have guided further progress in the sector. In agriculture, targeted analytical and advisory work has
supported gradual, but important, shifts in the Bank’s strategic approach. In other areas, however, the
effort to scale interventions back to core results may have swung the pendulum too far. In education
and health, once services had been restored in the aftermath of the crisis, the ISN left little to aim for
in furthering sector goals. In the area of economic justice, ISN objectives were drawn from the work
program of one ongoing intervention and thus provided little strategic guidance. While this shorterterm focus reflected a conscious choice to concentrate on stabilization and recovery in the lead-up to
a new medium-term government strategy, it may have sold short a few key areas of engagement.
Implementation
51.
Implementation of the CAS and ISN centered around coordinating strong donor partnerships
in support of the government’s broad policy priorities, combined with targeted support for capacity
building in public financial management. Linchpin programs such as the CSP were buttressed by
35

UNDP, World Bank. 2005. Operational Note on Transitional Results Matrices: Using Results-Based Frameworks
in Fragile States.

44

sector-specific operations in areas where the Bank had a history of engagement and expertise, as well
as high-quality economic and sector work and just-in-time advisory assistance.
52.
This approach helped the Bank leverage the limited resources available to Timor-Leste under
IDA14, attracting US$ 38.6 million in donor cofinancing as well as US$ 80 million in trust fund
resources over the period from FY2006 to FY2011. By comparison, the projects approved for TimorLeste during this same time period drew on US$ 42.1 million in IDA resources. The country team
also increased its human resources, expanding the number of technical staff in the country office and
placing an operations manager at the regional hub in Sydney.
53.
The country team’s decentralization efforts helped enhance the quality of supervision, a key
factor in the success of interventions in Timor-Leste. Supervision of the CSP involved twice-yearly
multidonor monitoring missions and was intensified through regular dialogue around the
government’s quarterly monitoring reports. These missions often dovetailed with supervision of
sector programs. Overall, the Timor-Leste country program’s supervision costs have tended to fall
below regional and Bankwide averages (Table 1), reflecting a balance between the absence of
investment lending and the greater supervision needs in a low-capacity, postconflict environment.
Table 1: Average Supervision Effort, US$ thousands
FY2006
FY2007
FY2008
FY2009
FY2010
FY2011
FY2012
Timor-Leste
77
64
80
52
41
64
93
East Asia and the Pacific
75
83
64
67
65
67
68
Bankwide
94
98
88
87
87
83
84
Notes: (1) Average supervision effort is the total cost of projects, including costs of support activities, in addition to
supervision, for a fiscal year, divided by the number of projects in the portfolio that fiscal year; (2) There is substantial
variation between projects on supervision costs. For example, in 2008, the HSSP cost was US$7,000, whereas PFMCBP was
US$243,000. (Note that data for FY2012 were added to the table on February 12, 2013.)

54.
Under the ISN, proposed interventions that did not fit with refocused priorities or have
sufficient government buy-in were dropped. Though these adjustments contributed to narrower, more
flexible approaches in most sectors, the speed of interventions was held back by staffing challenges,
burdensome procurement and operational systems, and limited country implementation capacity.
Table 2: Timor-Leste Portfolio Highlights
FY2006

FY2007

FY2008

FY2009

FY2010

FY2011

FY2012

No. of projects

7

8

6

6

6

8

6

No. of projects at risk

0

2

2

4

4

5

3

No. of potential problem projects
No. of problem projects

Net commitment amount
Commitments at risk
Projects at risk

% of total, by number
% of total, by amount

Proactivity

Satisfactory projects at exit, by number*

0
0

1
1

1
1

4
0

1
3

2
3

2
1

53.8

40.8

20.4

19.5

24.5

49.5

46.1

0%

25%

33%

67%

67%

63%

50%

50%

50%

66.7%

0%

100%

0

0%

14.5

36%

7.9

39%
0%

17.6

90%

100%

12.6

51%

Disbursement ratio
48.8
37.2
18.8
38.0
28.7
* Project outcome rating = Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory, Source: IEG Outcome
Indicators (SAP) (Note that data for FY2012 were added to the table on February 12, 2013.)

45

17.5

8.1

35%

17.60%

27.6

16.1

33%
n/a

50%
n/a

55.
Project outcome ratings were mixed, both during and after the crisis. For all seven projects
approved in FY2006 and FY2007 and reviewed by the IEG upon exit, project outcomes were rated
moderately unsatisfactory. By comparison, 42 percent of project outcomes for the 28 projects
approved between FY2000 and FY2005 and reviewed by the IEG upon exit were rated either
satisfactory or moderately satisfactory. 36 The IEG’s CPE did not review any projects approved
between FY2008 and FY2010. These data may indicate that project design suffered during the
volatile crisis period given high levels of uncertainty and change. Project management quality seems
to have fared better in response to the crisis, with at least half of projects receiving satisfactory or
moderately satisfactory ratings at exit in all years except FY2009 (Table 2).
56.
Portfolio performance declined after the crisis, however. The number of projects at risk has
risen to around two-thirds in the last three years, representing 90 percent of commitments in FY2009.
Proactivity has varied widely, reflecting the small size of the portfolio, where actions taken on one
project greatly affect aggregate statistics. The disbursement ratio has been on par with or above the
East Asia regional average, rising to nearly 40 percent in 2009 owing in part to heavy disbursement
from the PFMCBP. This performance reflects the difficulties of implementing a challenging program
under considerable uncertainty and risk, as well as the distinct operating environments at various
points in this new nation’s young history. The Bank’s performance during the CAS and ISN period
was most successful in areas where the greatest congruence existed between Bank programming and
government priorities and where intensive supervision with considerable face time was carried out.
57.
Several projects in the portfolio were restructured to enhance their effectiveness and better
align their objectives with country development goals. The PFMCBP was formally restructured in
early 2010 to address emerging priorities and reduce the program’s scope and complexity. A MidTerm Review in June 2010 found that the PFMCBP had made a significant contribution to
strengthening capacity across its target agency, the MOF. The Energy Services Delivery Project was
restructured to scale up the impact of the successful distribution component. The Youth Development
Project was restructured to, among other reasons, enhance the realism of outcome indicators and
targets, reduce risks to outcomes, increase project sustainability, and improve results measurement.
58.
A 2008 Quality Enhancement Review (QER) of the Timor-Leste program encouraged greater
focus, simplicity in project design, and better follow-through on analytical work. 37 The QER
supported the Bank’s role in helping convene donors around a common agenda, including the use of
sectorwide programs to reduce disparate donor demands on government, but criticized their design as
too complex. The QER was disappointed with the impact of Bank analytical work in areas such as
health, social protection, and youth employment, implying that there was more focus on the product
than on catalyzing change. While the QER underestimated the time it can take to translate analysis
into action in Timor-Leste, the Bank has modified how it conducts analytical work in the country.
59.
In the past, the country team occasionally missed opportunities to disseminate the findings of
analytical work in an accessible manner and to translate those findings into policy and operations.
Learning from this experience, recent initiatives on agricultural productivity, natural resource
benefits sharing, and capacity building have replaced a report-oriented approach with an interactive
series of debates, presentations, and tailored policy notes aimed at specific audiences. The role of the
country team’s external communications group has been expanded. There is a strong preference for
36

Independent Evaluation Group. 2011. Timor-Leste Country Program Evaluation, 2000-2010: Evaluation of the
World Bank Group Program. Washington DC: World Bank.
37
World Bank. 2008. Quality Enhancement Review: Pacific Islands. Washington DC: World Bank.

46

analytical work that has grown out of clear government demand and links closely with ongoing or
potential operations. This focus on analytical work is reflected in higher-than-average completion
costs in most years (Table 3). The provision of high-quality knowledge products is an important part
of the Bank’s contribution in Timor-Leste, particularly in light of its comparatively limited financial
role. Creation and dissemination of high-quality, highly relevant analytical work is expected to be a
significant area of focus under the next CPS.
Table 3: Average Completion Costs for Analytical and Advisory Activities, US$ thousands
FY2006
FY2007
FY2008
Timor-Leste (for active or closed, not dropped)
124
300
215
East Asia and the Pacific
161
182
134
Bankwide
170
183
177
(Note that data for FY2012 were added to the table on February 12, 2013.)

FY2009
154
126
188

FY2010
146
200

FY2011
26
190
218

FY2012
185
215

60.
One of the Bank’s principal roles in Timor-Leste has been to help bring the country’s many
donors together around a coordinated agenda. This role was cemented under the CAS and ISN by the
Bank’s administration of the multidonor CSP and PFMCBP and its support for the National
Priorities. The Bank has provided substantial technical assistance to the MOF’s National Directorate
for Aid Effectiveness and chairs a biweekly donor coordination meeting.
V.

Lessons Learned and Recommendations for the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)

61.
The whole-of-government approach embodied by the CAS was too broad and ambitious
given Timor-Leste’s severe capacity challenges. Though designed in response to the fledgling
country’s desire to move forward on multiple fronts and the donor community’s optimism about the
country’s prospects, the CAS set overly high expectations for what could be accomplished in three
years and may have diffused focus on key priorities. Now, after the tenth anniversary of TimorLeste’s independence, the government and donors are more attuned to the need for careful
prioritization and sequencing of the development agenda, and for tempering expectations and
communicating with citizens about challenges. It will be important for the CPS to present a truly
strategic, prioritized, and realistic plan for supporting Timor-Leste’s development. However, in the
search for achievable objectives, it should be careful not to reach only for low-hanging fruit.
62.
Achievement of the CPS will require sustained efforts to strengthen institutions and build
implementation capacity across the board. The obstacles to institutional development in Timor-Leste
are thorny, deeply embedded in the country’s history and culture and not well understood in the
donor community. The public sector has essentially had to build technical skills and expertise from
scratch, a long-term challenge that is exacerbated by: (i) a weak management culture in the civil
service, (ii) capacity constraints associated with the government’s language policy, in which the
formal and working languages are different from that in which the majority of civil servants are
literate; and (iii) the gap between slowly growing capabilities and quickly expanding ambitions.
63.
In parallel with project-based efforts to support capacity strengthening, CPS interventions
will need to be designed with current capacity constraints in mind. This will mean a disciplined
approach to ensuring simple project design and realistic, monitorable indicators of progress. In
Timor-Leste, it will be more effective to aim for “best fit” rather than “best practice.” Program
design will need to be flexible given the risks posed by the country’s fragile stability and uncertain
funding. In developing the CPS, the team would be well served in drawing on the Bank’s framework
for engagement in fragile states, which emphasizes the centrality of efforts to build state capacity and
47

accountability, the interlinkages between peacebuilding and development, the importance of broad
international partnerships, and the need for strong and flexible institutional responses. 38
64.
This simplified, concretely monitorable approach will need to be underpinned by a strong
results matrix that lays out a streamlined set of clearly defined goals and targets that are both
measurable and regularly measured as part of broader monitoring processes (rather than standalone
indicators reviewed only under the auspices of the CPS process itself). Given the need for flexibility
and adaptability in any development context, and particularly the fluid situation in Timor-Leste at
this time, a useful results matrix is one that can be amended to reflect changing circumstances and
development needs. The upcoming CPS will make use of the mid-term CPS Progress Report to
conduct a thoughtful review and modification of the results matrix with the aim of strengthening its
relevance and utility.
65.
Implementing programs in Timor-Leste’s capacity-constrained environment will imply
continuous hands-on support. Experience has shown that interventions in Timor-Leste gain more
traction when supported by intensive dialogue, sustained technical assistance, and close supervision.
Under the CAS and ISN, Bank programs consistently underestimated the time it took to complete
procurement and financial management procedures. Successful approaches are process-intensive and
require more staff and more generous budgets than would otherwise be the case.
66.
Timor-Leste’s rapidly growing national budget, together with the Bank Group’s increasingly
constrained resource envelope for the country, will necessarily change the nature of the Bank’s
relationship with the country. Maintaining relevance will require innovative approaches to working
in a nontraditional environment. Operational interventions will continue to be just one facet of a
multidimensional program, buttressed by high-quality, creatively disseminated analytical work; justin-time advice; convening power; organizational support; and sustained policy dialogue. In some
cases, the Bank Group’s most effective contributions may be delivered behind the scenes, and it will
be a challenge to incorporate these informal but valuable activities into the definition of results
expected from the CPS.

38

Fragile States—Good Practice in Country Assistance Strategies (IDA/R2005-0252), December 22, 2005.

48

CASCR Annex 1: Summary of Timor-Leste CAS/ISN Program Self-Evaluation 39
CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
CAS Outcome (Pillar I)
Increased access to and improved
efficiency and quality of basic
education*
• Net enrolment rate for both girls
and boys in grade one at least 85%
• 95% of grade one girls and boys
continue to grade two

Status and Evaluation Summary
Achieved.

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• Fundamental School Quality

• Net enrolment rate 87.55% in 2011,

up from 67% in 2004-05. NER for girls
in 2011: 87.14%; for boys, 87.94%.
• Grade 1 to Grade 2 survival rate at
95.2% overall in 2011; 95.5% for boys
and 94.9% for girls.

39

Project (TFET) (FY02-07; S)

• Consolidation Support

Program (CSP) (FY06-07; MU)

• Primary Education Support

Project (FTI-CF) (FY06-09; no
ICR or ISR required)
• Education Sector Support
Project (ESSP), with additional
financing (IDA Grant/AusAID)
(FY07-13; S/S)
• Fast Track Initiative Bridging
Project (FTI-CF) (FY09-11; S)
AAA:
• Youth in Crisis (FY08)

Lessons for the New CPS
• Core capacity—that which

is necessary for
implementation—should be
ensured prior to
implementation in order to
avoid risk of stalling. Analysis
of core capacity helps support
additional capacity building
during implementation.
• Pairing of Timorese
national consultants with
international experts at all
levels, positive engagement
with civil society
organizations, and
participation of local
communities were key factors
in the success of the FTI
Bridging Project.
• In fragile and/or postconflict states, time and
resources are better focused
on promoting field-based
partnerships during
implementation than on timeconsuming and expensive
upfront production of a
standard Project Appraisal

Because there was a change in the Bank’s engagement following the 2006 crisis in Timor-Leste, some CAS activities were not pursued under the ISN. This
completion matrix covers outcomes foreseen under both the CAS and the ISN and reports on progress as of June 2012.

49

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

CAS Outcome (Pillar I)
Improved access to and quality of
primary health services*
• Measles and DPT3 vaccination
coverage increased from 45% to 55%

• Skilled attendance at birth increased

from 25% in 2003 to 40%

• Annual outpatient visits per capita

increased to 2.5
• Targeted health promotion
programs implemented, particularly
for youth on HIV/AIDS, STDs and
communicable diseases, reproductive
health, and road safety/accident
prevention

Status and Evaluation Summary

Partially Achieved.
• Measles and DPT3 vaccination

targets exceeded. Per the Demographic
and Health Survey (DHS) (2010):
DPT3, 66%; Measles, 68%. Per the
Health Management Information
System (HMIS) (November 2011):
DPT3, 62%; Measles, 70%.
• Increase in skilled attendance subject
to data discrepancies; measured at 30%
in DHS (2010) and 51% in HMIS
(November 2011).
• Annual outpatient visits per capita at
1.8 (September 2011).
• TA and training provided to support
health promotion activities in
collaboration with United Nations
agencies. Modest progress on
communicable diseases and
reproductive health; limited focus on
road safety.

50

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

Operations:
• Second Health Sector
Rehabilitation and Development
(TFET/EC) (FY01-08; MS)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• EC-funded Health Sector
Program (FY06-11; S)
• Health Sector Strategic Plan
Support Project (FY08-13;
S/MU)

AAA:

• Health Sector Review (FY11)
• Population Policy Note (FY09)
• HIV/AIDS Behavioral Survey

(FY10-11)

Lessons for the New CPS
Document.
• Broad, rapid project design,
combined with intensive,
well-resourced supervision,
can be effective in lowincome, low-capacity states.
• In the reconstruction phase,
there must be a clear focus on
broader sector strategy.
• Continuous guidance is
essential in the context of
limited institutional capacity,
and it is important for
adequate supervision
resources to be allocated.
• Close coordination with
development partners was
critical to sector development.
• Results frameworks, even
under a SWAp, need to
identify results that can be
achieved through project
interventions.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 2)
Service Delivery Capacity: Health
and Education Sector Programs
• Progress towards achieving
outcomes in health and education
articulated in respective sector plans

• Investment in formal and informal

education increasing to begin
addressing needs of alienated youth

Status and Evaluation Summary
Partially Achieved.
• Education: Achieved. Good progress

in achieving outcomes set out in the
Strategic Plan for Achieving Universal
Primary Education by 2015, including
higher primary completion rates, fewer
repeaters, more materials in
classrooms, and better-trained teachers.
• Health: Partially achieved. Increased
direct delivery of health services to
approx. 450 communities per month;
improved health infrastructure;
increased provision of information,
communication equipment, and solar
panels for health facilities; increased
health workforce capacity; and
improved storage, supply, and
distribution of pharmaceutical and
medical supplies.
• Achieved. Education budget has
grown from US$ 45.3 million in 2008
to a projected US$ 117.7 million in
2012.

51

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• ESSP, with additional
financing (IDA Grant/ AusAID)
(FY07-13; S/S)
• Fast Track Initiative Bridging
Project (FTI-CF) (FY09-11; S)
• EC-funded Health Sector
Program (FY06-11; MS)
• Health Sector Strategic Plan
Support Project (FY08-13;
S/MU)
AAA:
• Education Strategy (FY11,
under ESSP)
• Teacher Development Strategy
(FY11, under ESSP)
• Health Financing Note (FY11)

Lessons for the New CPS
• ISN objectives in education

sector were underambitious.
• It is a challenge to conduct
surveys in a timely manner.
• Coordinating role was not
appropriate for the WB in the
health sector, given the
number of other (larger)
donors in the sector and
limited WB staffing. Donors
that are funding a portfolio of
activities in the sector are
better placed to take the lead
on coordination.
• Focus on public financial
management in the sector
would be a good niche for
WB to fill to help MoH build
its core systems so that
donors can provide less
earmarked funding using
government systems and
processes in future.
• Other lessons listed under
the CASPR still apply.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

CAS Outcome (Pillar I)
Improved efficiency of power
supply and collection in the
national capital to allow greater
spending on district power
services*

Partially Achieved.

• Reduced fuel costs in comparison to

• Fuel cost savings estimates exceeded

regional benchmark Singapore FOB

with discounted fuel savings of US$
3.85 million through installation of new
generator with reliable generation
capacity of 4.7 MW. Estimates based
on average diesel oil prices from the
time of commissioning in April 2007 to
the project’s completion report in
January 2008. Regional benchmark
comparisons were not made.
• Overall efficiency of Dili generation, • Technical and nontechnical system
distribution, and collections improved, losses reduced from about 56% in June
as measured by increased collections
2007 and 69% in December 2007 to
per liter of fuel from 30 to 45
about 41.7% in September 2011;
revenue collections thus increased from
31% in December 2007 to about 58%
in September 2011.
• EDTL institutional capacity
• Technicians trained in hands-on
strengthened
operational work, but transfer of
professional managerial skills to EDTL
local staff largely lacking due in part to
insufficient local staff who could be
trained. Capacity building activities
foreseen under ESDP were not
implemented.
52

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• Power Sector Priority
Investments (TFET) (FY05-08;
MS)
• Public-Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility grants for legal
and regulatory development and
commercialization (FY05-07)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• Energy Services Delivery
Project (IDA Grant) (FY07-12;
MS/MU)
• PHRD for Energy Services
Delivery Project (FY06-08)
AAA:

• Household Energy (2007)
• Key Issues in Rural Energy

Policy (FY09-10)

Lessons for the New CPS
• Utility management

contracts should include
management of foreseen
capital projects and capacity
building of utility staff in their
scope of responsibilities.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
CAS Outcome (Pillar I)
Enhanced availability of reliable,
affordable power in the districts to
support social and economic
development*
• Reliable power restored to currently
connected customers in districts

• Measures to restore power services

to sub-districts and expand rural
access under implementation

Status and Evaluation Summary
Not Achieved.

• Under the Gas Seep Harvesting

Project, the government financed a
diesel-fired power plant that currently
serves as backup electricity supply to
700 existing customers and 610 new
customers. A 1-MW diesel unit, which
was transferred to Darabai station from
Comoro station, is providing power to
project areas.
• Rural Electrification Master Plan
updated in 2007.
• Strategic Development Plan (SDP)
for 2011-2030 includes renewable
energy and rural electrification
program.
• Gas seep distribution system
completed, but plans to build a seep
gas-fired generation plant dropped
following tests showing insufficient gas
resources for plant design
specifications.

53

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program on rural
electrification (FY06-07)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• Gas Seep Harvesting (TFET)
(FY07-12; HU/U)
AAA:
• Household Energy (2007)
• Key Issues in Rural Energy
Policy (FY09-10)
• ASTAE Rural Electrification
Master Plan and Implementation
Manual (FY05-08)

Lessons for the New CPS

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
CAS Outcome (Pillar I)
Recognition of veterans of the
resistance on the basis of national
consultations*
• Veterans recognized in accordance
with law

• National policy on assistance to

veterans followed by Government,
NGOs, and donors

ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 3)
Sustaining an Effective Safety Net
for the Most Vulnerable
• Efficient and sustainable range of
social protection programs in place

Status and Evaluation Summary
Partially Achieved.

• Definition of “veterans” enshrined in

veterans law.

• Recognition ceremonies conducted in

2006-2008, and nearly 13,988 veterans
awarded medals by mid-2008;
facilitated by registration database with
over 75,000 veterans or their survivors.
• National policy on assistance to
veterans under revision; veterans’
pension system established; first
payments to 12,538 beneficiaries made
in July 2008.
Partially Achieved.
• Range of cash transfer programs

introduced, becoming one of budget’s
largest spending items.
• Yet policy development has been
piecemeal and lacked prioritization, and
program design has some weaknesses
in management of beneficiary
information, local administrative
capacity, payment mechanisms,
outreach, targeting, and M&E. After
completion of diagnosis and initial
operational work under previous
nonlending TA, issues of policy and
54

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• Post Conflict Fund Grant
(FY05-06)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• Institutional Development
Fund Grant on Institution
Building for Veterans Policy
Implementation (FY05-08)

Lessons for the New CPS

AAA:
• Veterans’ Policy Note (FY08)

Operations:
• Social Protection
Administration Project (FY1113)
AAA:

• Social Protection

Administration TA (FY11-13)

• Social Protection NLTA

(FY11-13)

• Vulnerability Analysis (FY08-

11)

• While AAA support has

been considerable, more
effort is needed to ensure that
AAA is disseminated
effectively and yields
constructive recommendations for use in further
operations. QAG report
acknowledged that excellent
AAA work carried out under
difficult circumstances was
not followed up or finalized
with government in a timely
manner.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary
program management will be tackled in
a follow-on project and nonlending
TA.

ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 3)
Tackling Youth Unemployment
and Alienation
• Major national temporary
employment ‘bridge’ created,
particularly in rural areas

Partially Achieved.

• Alienated youth engaged in

• Local development projects under

productive community-based activities

ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 3)
Promoting Equitable Access to
‘Economic Justice’
• Decision-makers and donors more
aware of local communities’ needs

• Not achieved; WB disengaged from

this area after dropping planned
National Workfare Project at
government’s request. Other donors
have engaged in limited activities in this
area.

way in 5 districts, identified and
implemented by youth groups; 208
projects completed.
Achieved.
• Decision-makers’ awareness

improved. Chapter on community land
inserted in draft land law, and proposal
for expansion into separate organic
law.
• Donors’ awareness improved through
Donor Coordination Working Group
on land, particularly regarding need to
consult with local communities and
complexities of land acquisition and
resettlement for infrastructure projects.
55

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

Operations:
• Youth Development Project
(FY09-12; MS/MS)
• Emergency National Workfare
Project (Dropped)
• Second Chance Education
Project (FY11-16; S/S)
AAA:
• Youth in Crisis (FY08)

AAA:
• EAP Justice for the Poor
(FY09-13)
• Social Accountability in
Participatory Transfer and Grant
Programs (FY09-12)
• Customary Systems of Land
Management and Rural
Development (FY09-12)
• Justice for the Poor advisory
services, just-in-time analysis

Lessons for the New CPS

• Including youth as a “cross-

cutting” theme under the
CAS did not provide
sufficient impetus to develop
and implement targeted youth
activities; this approach was
amended for the ISN.
• National Workfare Project
was dropped due to limited
interest and commitment on
the part of the government.

• Difficulties of

simultaneously aspiring to
high-quality research outputs
and local capacity building
can be underestimated in lowcapacity environments.
• Working with local CSOs is
time consuming, and
engagement strategies may
need to be adapted midstream in light of country
realities.
• Focus on process-intensive
engagements might yield

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

• Effective conflict management and

• Some progress. Safeguards for

CAS Outcome (Pillar II)
Jobs created directly through
budget implementation and
overseas employment programs*
• Increased private sector
employment through improved
budget implementation, with an
emphasis on labor-intensive programs

Not Achieved.

rights protection considerations
integrated into development processes

• 3,000 jobs created overseas for
Timorese workers with adequate
representation of women and youth

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

recently approved road project would
have applied OP4.10 (Indigenous
Peoples), but deemed unnecessary
following an ADB social assessment.
• Though dialogue continues, there has
been little progress in dialogue with
government on increasing social
accountability and rights protection
into country-led development
processes, particularly in the area of
land.

• Jobs being created through labor-

intensive programs, but no specific
monitoring of jobs created through
budget implementation more broadly.
• By FY08, nearly 6,000 projected
annualized jobs created via business
development center-supported
businesses, new FDI, and market place
construction under 2nd SEP.
• Not achieved; 265 workers sent to
South Korea (231 men, 34 women).

56

Operations:
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• Planning and Financial
Management Capacity Building
Program (FY07-13; S/S)
• Second Small Enterprises
Project (TFET) (FY02-08; MS)
AAA:
• 2008 Budget Employment
Impact (FY09)
• Youth Development & Labor
Market (FY08)
• Youth Open Space (FY07)
• Infrastructure Constraints
Study (FY06)
• Gas Pipeline TA (Dropped)

Lessons for the New CPS
good results by influencing
outcomes once Bank and
program credibility have been
established.

• Though recognizing the

need for movement on job
creation in the short term,
while awaiting longer-term
progress on private sector
development, the piecemeal
approach adopted under the
CAS was insufficient to meet
the country’s significant
nationwide employment
needs or the high
expectations set by the CAS
outcomes.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

CAS Outcome (Pillar II)
Achieved.
Improved private sector enabling
environment, resulting in increased
trade, investment, and jobs*
• Laws on investment, leasing, credit
• New investment law passed in 2011
and collateral approved
and now in effect; this replaced two
previously approved investment laws.
Laws on leasing of state and private
property approved. There is currently
no law on credit, but there are new
administrative procedures. Law on
collateral entered into force in March
2012.
• Business registration procedures

streamlined

• Improved performance against

“Doing Business” indicators

• Number of procedures required

dropped to 6 in 2012 from 10 in 2006.
Time for business registration has
decreased from 157 days in 2005 to 13
days as of March 2012. Ranked 157th of
183 countries in 2011 on ease of
starting a business, down from 152nd in
2010.
• Achieved; ranked 168th of 183
countries in 2011 (Doing Business
2012) on overall ease of doing
business, up from 174th of 175 in 2006.
Further improvements expected in
2013 rankings as a result of the new
One Stop Shop for business
registration and streamlined
procedures.

57

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• Second Small Enterprises
Project (TFET) (FY02-08; MS)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• IFC: Better Business Initiative
(annual)
• IFC: Advisory support on cost
of doing business (Dropped)
• IFC planning investments in
tourism, manufacturing, and
infrastructure; none completed
AAA/Advisory Services:
• Private and Financial Sector
Review (FY06)
• Diagnostic Trade Integration
Study (FY11)
• IFC Doing Business in TimorLeste (annual)
• IFC Small and Medium
Enterprise Demand Study (2010)

Lessons for the New CPS

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

Status and Evaluation Summary

• 1,000 new jobs created through non-

• Likely achieved, but no data collected

• Increased number of entrepreneurial

• Nearly 3,000 jobs created in 2007;

petroleum private investment
(measured on a gross basis)

jobs, especially for women and youth

• Greater consultation between

Government and private sector

• USD 10 million in new Foreign

Direct Investment

• USD 10 million increase in nonpetroleum exports
CAS Outcome (Pillar II)
Improved access to credit for
private investment and working
capital*
• Increased number of microfinance
institutions, in both rural and urban
areas

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

Lessons for the New CPS

on actual rather than expected jobs
created.

based on a small sample of
entrepreneurs trained in business
management (188), 96% were women,
86% were still in business employing
1.5 workers on average; no data on
youth.
• Government-business consultation
strengthened through biannual Better
Business Initiative Forum and
associated working groups.
• Achieved; actual investments at US$
44.3 million in 2010, up from US$ 8.5
million in 2006.
• Partially achieved; merchandise
exports at US$ 12.7 million in 2008, up
from US$ 8.1 million in 2005.
Partially Achieved.

• Three institutions providing

microcredit to women in rural areas;
aside from Banco Nacional Comercio
de Timor-Leste, Moris Rasik and Tuba
Rei Matin have 19 branches and 5 subbranches, with 17,000 borrowers
among them—a slight increase from
58

Operations:
• Financial Reform and
Strengthening (FIRST) Initiative
(FY07-09)
• IFC: Support for credit registry
(Dropped)
AAA:
• Private and Financial Sector
Review (FY06)
• Timor-Leste Strategy for

• Strong central bank

commitment crucial if some
key stakeholders are not at
first fully supportive of a
credit registry or if they want
to limit its membership.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

• Increased coverage by commercial

banks in both rural and urban areas

• Increased lending for private

investment and working capital

• Increased access to credit for

women and youth
ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 4)
Creating a Basis for Enhanced
Private Sector Activity
• Steps and time required for
registering a business reduced

• Reform-focused consultation
between Government and private
sector continued and strengthened

Status and Evaluation Summary
the 16,700 borrowers receiving
microcredit from four microcredit
institutions in 2005.
• Three foreign-owned commercial
banks in operation, with 10 branches
and 16 ATMs; Banco Nacional
Comercio de Timor-Leste established
in July 2011 (out of IMfTL) and has
branches in 10 districts.
• Total commercial bank lending to the
private sector up 23% from US$ 87
million at end-2005 to US$ 107 million
in mid-2011.
• Good progress in reaching women;
no special outreach toward youth.
Achieved.
• Number of procedures and days
decreased from 10 and 147,
respectively, in 2008, to 6 and 13 as of
March 2012.
• IFC supported establishment of

Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(CCI) and its first national Congress.
• Ongoing dialogue between
government and private sector on
private sector priorities such as access
to financial services, trade facilitation,
and business registration (One Stop
Shop).
59

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Establishing a Credit Registry
(TA, FY06-09)
• FIRST: Timor-Leste Strategy
for Establishing a Credit Registry
(TA, FY07-09)

Operations:
• Rural Growth (Dropped)
AAA:

• Timor-Leste Public-Private

Dialogue (IFC Advisory Service,
FY08-10)
• Timor-Leste Business
Registration and Licensing (IFC
AS, FY2009-11)

Lessons for the New CPS

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
• Private sector capacity to prioritize
and address PSD needs and make
specific policy recommendations
improved

• Government ability to structure and
execute public-private partnerships in
a transparent and competitive manner
improved
• SME loan products piloted and
options evaluated to improve access
to financial services

• Outside peer private sector
expertise brought in to help address
market imperfections
CAS Outcome (Pillar II)
Enhanced sustainable resource
management*
• Legal and regulatory framework and
systems in place for sustainable
development of agriculture and
fisheries

Status and Evaluation Summary
• CCI is receiving training from the

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

Government of Victoria, Australia,
with IFC support. They recently
participated in tripartite discussions on
the minimum wage and labor law.
• Assistance provided to CCI in
offering detailed recommendations to
government on private sector priorities.
• Decree law on public-private
partnerships approved in March 2012.
• Government has a new office for
public-private partnership development
and a short list of prioritized
partnerships for 2012-2013.
• Credit Registered Integrated System
developed for businesses, including
methods to facilitate loans to small
businesses.
• RSF market study for design now in
progress.
• Victoria Chamber of Commerce
helping the CCI to address private
sector development needs in TimorLeste.
Partially Achieved.
Operations:
• Third Agricultural
Rehabilitation Project (FY04-09;
• Some progress, though
MU)
implementation slow and difficult to
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
assess; Forestry Policy and Strategy
• Agricultural Performance
drafted, but no regulatory systems in
Improvement Program (APIP)
place. Reasonable progress on
(Delayed to end-2012 pending
60

Lessons for the New CPS

• The absence of a

systematic, comprehensive
approach held back attempts
to make meaningful progress
in the agriculture sector.
• More sustained engagement
of key players, especially in
the ministry, was needed.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

• Monitoring and control system
functioning and licensed boats in
operation
CAS Outcome (Pillar II)
Building blocks for improved food
security and food production in
place*
• Coordinated national system
established for seed/tuber testing,
multiplication and distribution
• Timely reporting and monitoring of

food security

• Agricultural extension model
piloted, with increased information to
farmers, particularly women

Status and Evaluation Summary
developing a regulatory framework, but
implementation and impact are still
minimal.
• System in place, but monitoring
selective and control limited.
Partially Achieved.

• Good progress toward release of 6

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
completion of sector expenditure
framework)
AAA:
• Timor-Leste Country
Environmental Analysis (FY0610)
Operations:
• Third Agricultural
Rehabilitation Project (FY04-09;
MU)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• APIP (Delayed to end-2012)

new crop varieties (with support from
AusAID and ACIAR); significant
impact expected once sufficient seed
AAA:
and planting materials available.
• Rural Growth Strategy
• Food security reporting and
(Dropped)
monitoring remains inadequate, as food
production statistics are unreliable.
Ministry’s Food Security Unit making
some progress but hindered by lack of
resources and data reliability.
• One small pilot undertaken; national
extension strategy in place; over 400
extension officers based in nearly every
suco (village), though their effectiveness
limited due to inadequate operational
budgets (for travel, training, etc.). No
specific attention to female farmers.
Extension officers will be assisted
through EU-funded Rural
Development Program IV.
61

Lessons for the New CPS

• More technical assistance

and regular independent
technical reviews required
from the start, given
difficulties in systematically
gathering and analyzing data.
• In conditions such as those
in Timor-Leste, new
initiatives need to be pilottested before nationwide
implementation to strike a
balance between achievement
of outputs and knowledge
transfer.
• Donor coordination in the
sector is a priority, given the
large number of donors
providing (often competing
or duplicative)
recommendations.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
CAS Outcome (Pillar II)
Enhanced business-oriented
production of agricultural
products*
• Increased production and earnings
from agriculture cash products,
including high value, organic, and
alternative products

ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 4)
Support for Enhanced Rural
Activity
• Policy and investment framework
developed to influence rain-fed and
small-scale irrigated agriculture

• Rural development planning and
budget quality improved

Status and Evaluation Summary
Not Achieved.

• Coffee remains the only high-value

crop.

• Annual coffee production increased

to 8,000-14,000 metric tons of green
beans on 52,000 ha of cultivated land
in 2007-2009.
• Export earnings grew to US$ 12.6
million in 2008 from US$7.6 million in
2005.
• No progress was made in developing
production or markets for high-value
crops.
Achieved.
• Agricultural Performance

Improvement Program presented by
WB in early 2010; recommendations
gradually being integrated into
government strategy documents. WB
expects to continue influencing this
policy and investment framework with
Global Food Crisis Response Program
funding in 2011-12.
• Some improvement in development
planning and budget quality; SDP
shows signs of further improvement.

62

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• Third Agricultural
Rehabilitation Project (FY04-09;
MU)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• APIP (Delayed to end-2012)
AAA:
• Diagnostic Trade Integration
Study (DTIS) (FY11)

Operations:
• APIP (FY10).
AAA:

• Raising Agricultural

Productivity (FY09-11)

• Advisory services, policy

papers, Government-donor
dialogue on agriculture enabling
environment

Lessons for the New CPS
• Encouraging large-scale

private sector investment in
agricultural products,
particularly cash crops, will
remain a challenge until issues
of land registration and
ownership in rural areas are
addressed. Developing this
sector will require leveraging
Bank support to the
government on policy
frameworks and IFC
expertise in public-private
partnerships and private
sector investment.
• World Bank was

increasingly able to influence
outcomes and strategies
through direct policy advice
to key decision makers.
General advice did not seem
to work; instead, it is
necessary to work with
counterparts within a
framework that is agreed with
government, and to have
access to key policymakers.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
• Assessment and review of rural
development investment options
strengthened
• Partner resources aligned to support
implementation of identified measures

CAS Outcome (Pillar III)
Safeguards against corruption and
abuse of power in place, with
increased awareness of citizens’
rights*
• Provedor functioning credibly in

education, prevention, and
investigation of corruption

Status and Evaluation Summary
• Some improvement in assessment

and review of rural development
investment options, and signs of
further improvement in SDP.
• Some improvement in the focus of
partner resources on key issues and
constraints as well as opportunities;
expected to increase under SDP and
Action Plans.
Partially Achieved.

• Provedor established and functioning,
though small staff size hampers the
timeliness and quality of investigations
and reports. Provedor no longer
responsible for anticorruption,
following establishment of AntiCorruption Commission in June 2009
and appointment of a Vice Prime
Minister with anticorruption mandate.
The ACC is undertaking investigations
and working with government agencies
to prevent corruption. The VPM with
responsibility for anti-corruption was
removed from his position after
repeatedly criticizing the government
for its failure to address corruption.

63

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

Operations:
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
• IDF Grant on Institutional
Development of the Provedor
(FY04-08)
AAA:

• Communication and

Leadership Capacity for National
Renewal (LICUS/Pacific
Facility) (FY07-11)
• Analysis on civil service,
Petroleum Fund Law, Timor
Gap Law, and Public Investment
Management shared with
parliamentary committees.

Lessons for the New CPS

• In a low-capacity

environment such as that
found in Timor-Leste,
establishing institutions of the
state is a necessary but not
sufficient condition for
improved governance. To
succeed, these institutions
need to be backed by
sufficient financial and
human resources, buttressed
by sustained, hands-on
capacity-building support.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
• Adoption and implementation of

Leadership Code by Presidency,
Judiciary, Parliament and Executive
• Higher-quality, independent scrutiny
by Parliament, Court of Appeals,
media, and civil society

CAS Outcome (Pillar III)
Transparency and probity in
managing petroleum revenues*
• Petroleum revenue collection,
savings policy, and petroleum fund
functioning credibly

ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 1)
Support for Continued
Transparency in the Management
of Petroleum Revenues
• Continued adherence to sound
management of petroleum resources
and increased transparency in line
with EITI principles

Status and Evaluation Summary
• Not achieved; no leadership code

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

introduced.

• Parliamentary scrutiny has improved;

MPs increasingly vocal on public sector
accountability. Local NGOs and media
active on governance issues, publishing
cases of alleged corruption and
commenting on key government
initiatives for public discussion.
Achieved.
• Petroleum revenue collection

effective. Savings policy no longer in
operation as government escalates
drawdowns from Petroleum Fund.
Petroleum Fund Law amended in a
way that maintains integrity of Norway
Plus model.

Achieved.

• Petroleum management regime

continues to adhere to principles of
sound management and transparency
in line with EITI; methodology for
estimating sustainable income debated
in Parliament and amended.
• Though government has approved
64

Operations:
• Second Petroleum Technical
Assistance Project (TFET)
(FY03-07; S)
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
• EITI (FY09-12; no ISR yet)
AAA:
• Analysis of Petroleum Fund
Law amendment
Operations:
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
• EITI (FY09-12; no ISR yet)
AAA:
• Policy Note on National Oil
Company Oversight (BankNetherlands Partnership
Program TF) (FY09)
• Petroleum Support Project
(FY05-13)

Lessons for the New CPS

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

CAS Outcome (Pillar III)
Enhanced motivation and
responsibility among civil servants,
resulting in higher standards of
probity and service delivery*
• Career development and pay
structure introduced

Status and Evaluation Summary
spending over the ESI, spending
quality is poor; some changes made to
the Petroleum Fund contrary to advice
provided by World Bank and Norway’s
Petroleum for Development.
• Field audits of petroleum companies
have begun.
Partially Achieved.

• Decree Laws introduced for Civil

Service Act, Career Regime,
Recruitment, Performance and
Commission.
• Office of the Inspector General
• 16 audits, 3 inspections, 78
(OIG) reinforces integrity and
investigations completed as of June
accountability through inspections and 2007; 10 cases referred, none
investigations, with recommendations prosecuted; report summaries
implemented and reports published
published and posted online
CAS Outcome (Pillar III)
Partially Achieved.
Sound policy and legislative
process across Government*
• Progress in following policy and
• Legislative program developed,
legislative process by all entities,
setting out a timetable for the passage
including availability of draft laws,
of legislation.
appropriate consultations, and
coherent legislative timetable

65

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

Operations:
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
• IDF Grant on Institutional
Strengthening of the OIG
(FY04-08; MU)
AAA:

• Timor-Leste Civil Service

Review (FY10-12)

• TA on Strategic Planning for

MOF (FY11) – BETF PFMCBP

Operations:
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
AAA:

• Administrative Services

Capacity Building Project (FY0306)

Lessons for the New CPS

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
CAS Outcome (Pillar III)
Strengthened capacity to manage
for and monitor results on the
ground, with particular attention to
women and youth*
• Improved monitoring and
evaluation leading to higher quality
policy decisions and clearer priorities
• Capacity of the National Statistics
Directorate enhanced in conducting
and analyzing a household survey
program
• Poverty assessment results

incorporated into preparation of
future strategies
CAS Outcome (Pillar III)
Improved implementation of
budget in a transparent manner, in
line with savings policy and
sustainable growth and poverty
reduction goals*
• Improved financial management
with critical financial management
staff in place in MPF and line agencies

Status and Evaluation Summary
Partially Achieved.

• Limited progress; previous

administration’s Sector Investment
Plans discarded by new government,
which introduced SDP, National
Priorities, and Annual Action Plans.
• Overall capacity improved through
technical assistance and
implementation and analysis of a highquality living standards survey in 2007;
in-house capacity building still required
• Poverty Assessment completed in
2009, informed preparation of the
SDP.
Partially Achieved.

• Solid progress in strengthening PFM

systems. Improvements measured in 12
of 29 PEFA indicators between 2007
and 2010, often modest but
underpinned by real changes in work
practices, legislation, and IT systems.
Progress in indicators somewhat
undervalued by overly optimistic 2007
66

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
• IDF on Enhancing Poverty
Monitoring and Analysis (FY0609)
AAA:

• Poverty Assessment (FY09)
• Household Survey (FY08)

Operations:
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
• IDF Grant on Public
Expenditure Management
(FY03-07)
• Pacific Facility on Advice on
Budget Preparation (FY06-10)
AAA:

• Public Financial Management

Performance Report (FY11)

• PEFA 2010: led by IMF with

participation from WB

Lessons for the New CPS
• Targeted technical

assistance and hands-on
experience in survey
implementation have been
important factors in
strengthening capacity for
monitoring and evaluation, as
evidenced by the high quality
of the most recent household
income and expenditure
survey.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators

• Reduced unspent appropriations
• Combined Sources Budget and

budget execution reports published in
an accessible form, including mediumterm donor commitments

Status and Evaluation Summary
ratings.
• Some progress on budget execution;
excellent progress on carry-over
management
• Budget published online at time of
presentation to parliament. Budget
execution information available in real
time through Transparency Portal.
Open Budget Initiative rates TimorLeste 34/100, stating that it “provides
minimal information to the public in its
budget documents during the year”;
however, Timor-Leste has the
groundwork in place to improve its
rating quickly.
Partially Achieved.

CAS Outcome (Pillar III)
Enhanced revenue performance
through streamlined procedures
and mechanisms*
• Customs clearance times reduced for • In 2010, average reported times taken
low-risk shipments
for good to clear green line Customs
declarations improved. The next phase
of ASYCUDA will track this indicator.
• Improved revenue collection,
• Domestic revenue increased from
including from petroleum
US$ 52.8 million in 2008 to US$ 136.1
million in 2012 (projected). Petroleum
revenue increased from US$ 2.40
billion in 2008 to US$ 2.82 billion in
2012 (projected).

67

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)

Operations:
• CSP (FY06-07; MU)
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
AAA:

• TA on MoF Strategic Plan

identified improvements to
revenue administration.

Lessons for the New CPS

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 2)
Support for Transparent and
Effective Public Financial
Management
• Transparency and effectiveness in
public financial management
improved

• Ministry of Finance capacity for

prudent, effective and accountable
planning and management of public
finances improved to promote growth
and poverty reduction
ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 2)
Review Capacity-Building
Experience in Timor-Leste
• Technical assistance and skills
development strategy developed that
reflects lessons learned since
independence

Status and Evaluation Summary
Achieved.

• Transparency and effectiveness

improved in most areas, though
diminished in policy-based budgeting
as per PEFA indicators. Much progress
still to be made, e.g. when assessed
against PEFA “getting the basics
right.” Timor-Leste rates low against
Open Budget Initiative, but
groundwork is in place to improve
quickly.
• MOF capacity has improved
substantially between 2007 and 2012, as
described in PFMCBP Mid-Term
Review. The SDP for 2011-2030
evinces a step-change in capabilities.
Achieved.
• Output modified to a civil service

review and completed.
• Review of capacity building in MOF
conducted, yielding some discussion
with government and donors about
capacity building lessons.

68

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)
• IDF grant on building the
capacities of procurement
institutions to achieve
development outcomes (FY1114)
AAA:

• Advisory services, in-time

analytical inputs documented in
PFMCBP Mid-Term Review and
Strategic Plan (FY07-12)

AAA:
• Timor-Leste Civil Service
Review (FY11)
• PFMCBP Mid-Term Review

Lessons for the New CPS
• Progress on public financial

management benefited from
substantial resources allocated
to this area and sustained
approach that built upon
previous donor
commitments.
• Intensive use of
international consultants also
played a role.

• Challenges of institutional

development in Timor-Leste
not yet articulated or
understood widely across WB
and development partners.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 1)
Continued Support for the
National Priorities Exercise
• Government’s and international
partners’ commitment to the NPs
intensified

• Budget priorities influenced by NPs
• Partner alignment with

Government’s program enhanced,
with improved coordination among
international partners

Status and Evaluation Summary
Partially Achieved.
• Commitment did not intensify, but

continued through SDP launch; not a
negative, as decreased government
focus on the NPs was appropriate
following SDP launch. Mechanisms for
transition to longer-term SDP
implementation delayed due to laterthan-planned release of SDP;
government has developed a draft
framework for consideration and
donors eager to support the transition
once decision is made.
• NP process considered a highly
useful forum for exchange of
information; promoted by Timor-Leste
internationally as a best-practice model
of post-conflict, government-led
priority setting.
• Budget priorities marginally
influenced by NPs.
• Partners relatively well aligned with
government program, with reasonably
good donor coordination; regular
quarterly meetings to monitor progress
and refine priorities.

69

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
AAA:
• TA on NPs (FY08-12)

Lessons for the New CPS
• While enjoying broad

support initially, the process
waned as it was seen by some
to be too MoF-led and did
not enjoy equal buy-in from
all actors.
• Interest in the process
diminished significantly after
the SDP was launched; the
process should have been
better able to respond to the
changing context post-SDP.
• Together, the influence of
an election year and launch of
the SDP disrupted the
program and led some within
government and donor
organizations to question its
relevance.
• Insufficient
linkage/influence with the
budget-setting process was a
major factor in the NP’s
limited correspondence with
budget allocations.

CAS/ISN Outcomes and
Indicators
ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 1)
Bringing International Experience
of Post-Conflict Transition to
Timor-Leste: Support for the
National Strategic Planning
Exercise
• Strategy developed by Prime
Minister’s Office (PMO) that is
developmentally sound and conforms
to the country’s macroeconomic and
institutional capacities
ISN Outcome (Strategic Area 1)
Bringing International Experience
of Post-Conflict Transition to
Timor-Leste: Bank Group Policy
Work
• Dialogue intensified on transition
from post-conflict to long-term
growth and development

Status and Evaluation Summary
Partially Achieved.

Lending and Nonlending
Activities that Contributed to
Outcomes
(Approval-Completion Date;
ICR Outcome/ISR DO/IP)
Operations:
• PFMCBP (FY07-13; S/S)

Lessons for the New CPS

AAA:

• PMO Planning TA (Dropped)
• SDP developed and launched in July

2011; provides a development vision
for the country that is ambitious
relative to institutional capacities.

Partially Achieved.

• Some increase in dialogue, notably on

recommendations of Diagnostic Trade
Integration Study (DTIS), SDP,
telecommunications sector
liberalization, and agriculture.
• Trade strategy developed that
• DTIS completed and serving as the
enables Timor-Leste to increase
basis for dialogue on trade issues;
productivity and competitiveness in its extent to which this has resulted in
non-oil tradable sector and expand
national trade strategy unclear.
exports

70

AAA:
• Diagnostic Trade Integration
Study (FY11)
• Policy note on poverty
dynamics (FY09)

• The Bank Group should be

prepared to support the
government’s aid
effectiveness efforts and
commitments under the New
Deal for Engagement with
Fragile States, which include
use of country systems and
aid transparency.

CASCR Annex 2: CAS Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
(FY06-08)

CAS PLANS (06/22/2005)

Ongoing

Planned/New

STATUS

Project

US$ (M)

TFET Fundamental School Quality Project
TFET/EC Second Health Sector Rehabilitation
and Development Project
TFET Power Sector Priority Investments
Project
TFET/EC Third Agriculture Rehabilitation
Program
TFET Second Small Enterprises Project
TFET Second Petroleum TA Project
TA: Office of the Inspector General (IDF)
TA: Provedor (IDF)
TA: Strengthening Public Expenditure
Management (IDF)
TA: Public Expenditure Management and
Procurement Capacity Building (IDF)

20.6

Education for All FTI
EC-Funded Health Program
Energy Service Delivery Program
TFET Gas Seep Harvesting Project
GEF and CDCF Energy
Power Sector Lending

8.2
4.11
2.5
0.85
Not found
Not found

EC-funded Agricultural Program
GEF and BCF Natural Resource Management
TA: Light Labor Survey (IDF)
Planning and Financial Management Capacity
Building Program

33.1
1.4
11.3
7.5
1.7
0.09
0.22
0.32
0.31

US$ (M)
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Dropped
Actual

20.6
32.1
1.4
11.9
7.4
1.6
0.09
0.22
0.32
0.31
8.2
4.36
0
0.39
Not found

Not found

Actual (delivered to ESMAP on Rural
Electrification, FY06-07)
Not found

NLTA
Not found

Not found
Not found

Not found
Not found

Not found
Not found

71

TA: Strengthening Capacity for Poverty
Monitoring (IDF)
TA: Strengthening Parliamentary Capacity
(IDF)

32.6

Actual

31.0

0.3

Actual

0.3

Not found

Not found
IDF Grant on Institution Building for
Veterans Policy Implementation (FY0508)
Communication and Leadership Capacity
for National Renewal (LICUS/PF, FY0711)
Petroleum Support Project (FY05-13)
Advice on Budget Preparation (PF, FY0610)
Total Actual

Not found

Additional
Actual
Projects

Total Planned

125.1

72

0.16

1.7
0.089
0.11
122.3

CASCR Annex 3: ISN Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliverables
(FY10-11)

FY

ISN PLANS (08/12/2009)
Project

STATUS
US$ (M)
7.0
6.0
2.5
0.0

25.6
6.0
0.5
0.85

Actual
Actual
Dropped
Dropped

US$ (M)
IDA
TF
7.0
24.0
6.0
10.48
0
0
0
0

1.0

19.3

Actual

1.0

20.0

0.0
2.1

0.23
0.0

Actual
Actual

0
1.3

0.19
0

0.0
0.0
0.0
52.48

Additional Actual
Projects:
FTI Bridging Project
(FTI-CF, FY09-11)
ESSP Additional
Financing (FY10)
Dropped
Actual
Dropped
Total Actual

IDA
Ongoing

2010
2011

PFMCBP (FY06)
Education Sector Support (FY07)
Energy Services Delivery (FY07)
Gas Seep Harvesting (FY07)
Health Sector Strategic Plan Support
(FY08)
Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative TA (FY09)
Youth Development (FY09)

Emergency National Workfare
Second Chance Education
Rural Development
Total Planned

TF

3.5
5.0
4.1
31.2

73

0
4.9
5.0
0
3.2
0
24.5

0
0
0
59.57

CASCR Annex 4: CAS Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries
(FY06-08)
Ongoing

Planned/New

CAS PLANS (06/22/2005)
Veterans Clandestino Study
Health Sector Review
TA: Youth Leadership for Economic Development
(PCF)
TA: Youth Policy Development
TA: Veterans (PCF)
TA: Power Regulatory Framework (PPIAF Phase I)
TA: Rural Power Mapping (ESMAP)
Private and Financial Sector Review
Labor Market Study
Regional Flagship Study on Labor Mobility
Strengthening the Institutions of Governance
TA: Support to NDP (DfID)
Population Growth and Challenges
Youth: Challenges and Options
Making Services Work for the Poor
Veterans Policy Paper
Household Fuel Study
TA: Power Regulatory Framework (PPIAF Phase II)
Rural Growth Strategy
Doing Business in Timor-Leste (annual)
TA: Business Environment
TA: Collateral and Credit Registry (FIRST)
Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure Analysis (annual)
TA: Governance, including enhancing demand (Pacific
Facility, EITI)

STATUS
Completed FY07
Completed FY07
Completed FY07
Completed FY08
Completed FY06
Completed FY07
Completed FY07
Completed FY06
Completed FY08 (Youth Development and Labor Market Study)
No Information Found
No Information Found
Delivered under CSP
Completed FY09 (as “Population Policy Note”)
Completed FY09 (as “Timor-Leste’s Youth in Crisis”)
Dropped
Completed FY08
Completed FY07
Completed FY07
Dropped
Completed annually
Not found
Completed FY09
Completed FY09
Ongoing
No Information Found
Additional Actual Projects:
ASTAE Rural Electrification Master Plan and Implementation Manual (FY05-08)
Youth Open Space (FY07)
Country Environmental Analysis (FY06-10)

74

CASCR Annex 5: ISN Planned Non-Lending Services and Actual Deliveries
(FY10-11)

ISN PLANS (08/12/2009)
FY
PRODUCT
Ongoing TA and Policy Work on Rural Productivity and Growth
National Priorities Exercise
Poverty Assessment
Civil Service Reform
Social Protection Fiscal Sustainability and Payment Systems

CDD for Infrastructure
Telecommunications Sector Reform
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
Petroleum Sector Support
Justice for the Poor

2010

Continued support for National Priorities Exercise
Capacity Building Review
PFMCBP-related Analytical Work
Policy Note on National Oil Company Oversight (BNPP)

STATUS
Completed FY10
Completed FY10
Ongoing
Moved to FY11
Completed FY10, Follow on TA and AAA Ongoing
(“Social Protection Administration TA”, “TimorLeste Social Protection AAA)
Completed FY11
Completed FY11
Completed FY11
Ongoing
Completed (“Customary Systems of Land
Management and Rural Development”, “Social
Accountability in Participatory Transfer and Grant
Programs”, and “Women’s Participation in
Community-Investor Negotiations on Land and
Rural Development”), Follow on TA Ongoing
(“Legal and Social Accountability for Development
Assistance and Service Delivery”)
Completed FY12
Completed FY11 (Changed to “Civil Service
Review”)
Completed FY10 (PFM/PER, PEFA)
Completed (FY in 09)
Additional Products
Timor-Leste HIV/AIDS Behavioral Survey (FY1011)
Health Financing Note (FY10)

75

Key Issues in Rural Energy Policy (FY10)
2011

PFMCBP-related Analytical Work

Completed in FY11 (“TL Public Investment
Management”, “PFM Review”, “GET PPP”, PEFA
Review, TA on Strategic Planning for MOF, PFM
Performance Report”)
Additional Products
Building the capacities of procurement institutions to
achieve development outcomes (Approved FY11,
ongoing)
HD Policy Notes (Completed FY11)
TA on Rural Energy Access and Efficiency
(Completed FY11)
Health Sector Review (Completed FY11)
Education Strategy (Completed under ESSP, FY11)
Teacher Development Strategy (Completed under
ESSP, FY11)
Raising Agricultural Productivity (Completed FY09)

76

Annex 3: Assessing Gender Disparities in Timor-Leste
In the decade since independence, Timor-Leste has experienced high rates of economic growth, made
progress in developing its legal and policy framework, and re-established and strengthened basic
social service delivery throughout the country. These efforts impact men and women both directly
and indirectly, and have contributed to the closing of the gender gap in key areas, such as school
enrollment. However, substantial challenges remain. Consistent with the findings of the 2012 World
Development Report (WDR) on Gender Equality and Development, gender disparities persist as a
result of inequalities within households and in access to and participation in markets and institutions.
Early in the CPS period, the World Bank Group will conduct a Country Gender Assessment to
identify specific areas where gender disparities remain, where other development partners are
engaged, and where the WBG is well-placed to respond. This Assessment will feed into the
development of a Country Gender Action Plan in the CPS period. In the interim, the East Asia
Pacific companion piece to the 2012 WDR, the most recent Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) report, two recent IFC reports on gender,
investment, and economic opportunities, and gender assessments conducted by other development
partners have identified the following areas where progress on closing the gender gap is lagging:








Education: Young women are less likely than young men to receive the education and
training necessary to prepare them for workforce participation and income generation.
Though the female to male gross enrollment ratio for secondary education is nearly 1:1,
young women are much less likely to enroll in tertiary education. More than half of adult
women are illiterate.
Youth Opportunities and Outcomes: Youth of both genders face high rates of unemployment,
exclusion from political and economic decision-making, and poverty. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that high rates of alcohol consumption amongst male youth may increase the
likelihood that they engage in violent and anti-social behavior, and reduce their ability to find
gainful employment. The adolescent fertility rate is high by international standards, at 52
births per 1,000 girls aged 15-19. Early marriage and pregnancy limits young women’s
educational attainment and economic opportunity, and increases their likelihood of living in
poverty.
Health and Nutrition: Substantial gender disparities in health and nutrition exist throughout
the life cycle. Birth rates and maternal mortality ratios in Timor-Leste remain stubbornly
high, and care for women during pregnancy and delivery is insufficient for maternal and
child health. The contraceptive prevalence rate for married women aged 15-49 is just 22
percent, contributing to a high overall birth rate and increasing the risk of sexuallytransmitted infections for both men and women. Boys are more likely than girls to be
undernourished and have a higher under-five mortality rate. Stunting and wasting are
common for both boys and girls.
Economic Opportunities: Substantial disparities exist in women’s access to paid employment
opportunities, wage rates, and overall labor force participation, as well as access to finance
and economic inputs. High birth rates (an average of nearly 6 children per woman) contribute
to low employment rates and missed educational opportunities for women, and reduced
women’s mobility. Women’s labor tends to be concentrated in less lucrative activities, such
as handicrafts, household work, or subsistence agriculture activities. According to the IFC’s
2010 report on Economic Opportunities for Women in the Pacific, women make up over 40
percent of microentrepreneurs in Timor-Leste, but own just 16 percent of formalized
businesses.
77






Poverty: The poverty rate in Timor-Leste is close to 50%; the poverty rate for female-headed
households is higher than the poverty rate for male-headed households of the same size. 40
Crime and Violence: Domestic and gender-based violence is highly prevalent in TimorLeste; a 2010 study found that approximately one-third of women (38 percent) have
experienced physical violence since age 15. One percent of women experienced physical
violence often, while 28 percent experienced physical violence sometimes in the past 12
months (National Statistics Directorate, et al. 2010. Timor-Leste Demographic and Health
Survey 2009-2010. Dili: National Statistics Directorate). Timor-Leste’s Vulnerable Persons
Unit reports over 1,000 domestic violence cases per year in Dili alone, and estimates that for
every report, ten incidences of domestic violence go unreported. Excessive alcohol
consumption and hypermasculine identities that idolize violence contribute to the high rates
of familial violence. In contrast, men are disproportionately impacted by criminal and
political violence, including violence perpetrated by gangs.
Political participation: Women are well-represented in high-level Ministerial appointments
and in Parliament. However, at the sub-national level and within traditional governance
structures, women are highly underrepresented. Given the continued importance of traditional
or customary law throughout Timor-Leste, particularly for decisions related to family and
civil law, women’s underrepresentation at this level of governance could impede women’s
access to justice.

40

Gender-disaggregated data from the 2011 Household Income and Expenditure Survey is not yet available.
However, the most recent data from the 2007 Living Standards Survey shows higher poverty rates among women
and female-headed households.

78

Annex 4: Commitments under the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States
Peacebuilding and State-building Goals (PSGs)
1. Legitimate Politics - Foster inclusive political settlements and conflict resolution
2. Security - Establish and strengthen people’s security
3. Justice - Address injustices and increase people’s access to justice
4. Economic Foundations - Generate employment and improve livelihoods
5. Revenues & Services - Manage revenue and build capacity for accountable and fair service
delivery
FOCUS
1. Fragility Assessment – A self-assessment of stresses and sources of resilience
2. One Vision, One Plan – To guide Government and development partners
3. Compact – For harmonization and donor coordination
4. Use PSGs to Monitor – targets and indicators to assess progress
5. Support political dialogue and leadership – inclusive of civil society, women and youth
TRUST
1. Transparency – in the use of aid and fiscal systems
2. Risk-sharing – joint Government and Development Partner risk mitigation strategies
3. Use and strengthen country systems – strengthening financial systems for use by all
4. Strengthen capacities – build critical capacity of institutions
5. Timely and predictable aid – more flexible and faster

79

Annex 5: Overview of Main Trust Funds
The WBG is in discussions with AusAID for development of a 3-year, $15 million single-donor trust
fund modeled on the Pacific Facility and other successful arrangements in the region. The proposed
trust fund would staff positions based in Timor-Leste, as well as analytical and technical assistance
activities in mutually-identified priority areas. This TF is expected to come online in early FY14.
Education for All Fast Track Initiative funding supports the Management Strengthening Program,
which strengthens PFM, procurement, and evidence-based planning systems within the Ministry of
Education.
The Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction has provided funding for an assessment of climate
change/disaster risk reduction.
Through the Institutional Development Fund, the WBG is working to build the capacity of
procurement institutions in Timor-Leste. The grant supports strengthening of the legal and regulatory
framework for procurement, development of a procurement performance evaluation system, and
training activities for staff of the National Procurement Commission under the office of the Prime
Minister. The FY13 priority will be assisting the government to finalize the Procurement Omnibus
Law; future years will focus on procurement capacity building.
The Japanese Social Development Fund provided seed funding for preparation of a proposal for a
project to understand and ameliorate the causes of malnutrition in Timor-Leste. The follow-on
proposal will suggest activities to address malnutrition through multisectoral interventions, and will
complement ongoing WBG work.
The Justice for the Poor program has been active in Timor-Leste since 2008 and is now moving into
its second iteration. This AusAID-funded multi-country TF will examine patterns of spending in
major infrastructure projects, as well as consultation processes for infrastructure projects and the elite
bargains that emerge around distribution of infrastructure contracts. The program will develop
partnerships with civil society to pilot approaches to improved infrastructure spending and
consultation mechanisms, and ensure that grievances around infrastructure contracts are addressed.
The Rapid Social Response Trust Fund has provided $2 million ($1.45 million in recipient-executed
funds and $.55 million for Bank-executed complementary technical assistance) to improve program
management of the Ministry of Social Solidarity to implement core cash transfer programs in TimorLeste in an efficient, reliable, and transparent manner through standardized information management
and stronger program implementation and management capacity.
Much of the WBG portfolio is funded through free-standing trust funds, with both single and
multiple donor sources. The primary donors for these trust funds are Australia and the European
Commission. Free-standing trust funds support WBG activities in planning and financial
management, governance, education, health, and telecommunications.
In the CPS period, the WBG will be pursuing support from several new trust fund facilities. These
include the State and Peacebuilding Fund and UN-World Bank trust for activities with the Ministry
of Justice on land, the Global Environmental Facility and Global Agriculture and Food Security
Program for agriculture and rural development, and the Korean Trust Fund for Fragile States for
analytical and advisory activities to understand and address some of the remaining sources of
fragility in Timor-Leste.

80

Annex 6: Summary of 2011 IMF/WB Debt Sustainability Analysis
Until FY2012, Timor-Leste had no public debt. As a young nation with access to grants from
development partners, and with a large petroleum revenue reserve, the government has not borrowed
to finance development. However, Timor-Leste will borrow from development partners for the first
time during FY2013, recognizing both their potentially favorable financial terms, and the benefits of
project cycle assistance.
The government’s new fiscal plans aim to frontload capital spending to improve poor infrastructure,
which is one of the key constraints to developing the non-oil sector. The 2012 budget allows
borrowing of up to $160 million, $43 million of which will be for calendar year 2012. This is part of
a wider plan to borrow up to $483 million over 2012-16 to finance capital spending in the Strategic
Development Plan (SDP).
This amount is about twice the size anticipated at the previous DSA in 2010. About one-third of
these loans is expected to be concessional, with the remainder as non-concessional. Planned World
Bank lending under the CPS is within these amounts.
After 2016, the loan amounts are projected to decrease gradually in line with the previous DSA and
the SDP. The total borrowing amount would be 80 percent higher than in the previous DSA. The
share of concessional loans is expected to decline gradually, as with rising per capita income, TimorLeste will no longer be eligible for concessional loans over the long term.
Under the baseline scenario, all the debt burden indicators remain below their policy-dependent
indicative thresholds. However, debt vulnerability may increase, as suggested by the higher level of
debt service in the longer term associated with the repayment of non-concessional borrowing, as
evidenced by stress tests. This calls for a cautious approach to such borrowing and emphasizes the
importance of prudent debt management. Furthermore, while Timor-Leste’s public debt is still very
small, it might consider limits on borrowing as it plans to expand external borrowing.

81

82

Annex 7: Development Partner Focal Areas and Links to the Government’s Program
Asian Development Bank (ADB). ADB has been involved in the reconstruction and development of
Timor-Leste’s economy and social and physical infrastructure since late 1999. Timor-Leste became a
member of ADB in 2002. Over the 2011–2015 period, ADB will support the upgrade of the country’s
infrastructure (including provision of a long for upgrading the Dili-Bobonaro road corridor), Dili
water supply, and complementary initiatives in financial services, private sector development, and
skills training. Assistance will also be provided for good governance and capacity development,
gender equity, knowledge solutions, and helping Timor-Leste integrate with Asian economies.
Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID). Australia is Timor-Leste’s largest
partner, with an allocation of AUD$127.1 million (US$129.1 million) in Official Development
Assistance (ODA) to Timor-Leste in 2012-13. Australia and Timor-Leste signed a new development
partnership in November 2011, focusing on rural development, particularly rural roads and rural water
and sanitation; health; education; governance and security.
European Union (EU). The European Commission opened a fully-fledged Delegation in Dili in early
2008 to respond to the needs of intensified dialogue and cooperation between the Government of
Timor-Leste and the European Union. The majority of EU resources (43.5 million Euro, 54%) are
indicatively allocated to support sustainable rural development; 18 million Euros (22%) for capacity
building in the sector of Justice, Parliament and Media; and 9.75 million (12%) for health; leaving 7
million Euro allocated to other actions, particularly support to Non State Actors, and 2.5 million Euro
for PALOP (Portuguese speaking countries of Africa and Timor-Leste) programs.
France. France does not provide ODA to Timor-Leste. France’s main efforts in favor of Timor-Leste
are channeled through the United Nations and the UN Security Council (core funding of peacekeeping
mission and UN agencies), and through the European Union and the European Development Fund
(France contributes to 20% of the EDF). However, France intends to maintain bilateral cooperation
with Timor-Leste by having a small cooperation office based in Dili. The French Embassy also
provides small grants to Timorese NGOs, French NGOs, or French experts to implement projects.
German Government. German-Timorese Development Cooperation is concentrated on the focal
area of peace building. A strategic intervention in the maritime sector has been a further priority.
These activities are meant to contribute to social and economic prosperity, and peaceful development
of the country.
Japan International Cooperation Agency and Government of Japan. In 2012, the government of
Japan extended the first-ever foreign loan to Timor-Leste, for approximately US$70 million, for the
purpose of upgrading the road between Dili and Baucau, Timor-Leste’s second largest city. This
infrastructure investment is the key feature of Japan’s “Country Assistance Policy”, a five-year
strategy document that was completed in April of 2012.
New Zealand Aid Programme. The New Zealand Aid Programme is currently consulting with the
Government of Timor-Leste on the draft “Strategic Framework for Development” 2012-2015 for
Timor-Leste, which will guide New Zealand’s official development assistance to Timor-Leste. The
content and scope of the draft Framework was consulted very closely with key development partners
and government over the period 2009-2010. The proposed focal areas of the Framework for
Development are: Education and Training; Security and Justice; and Private Sector Investment, in
support of the pillars of Timor-Leste’s Strategic Development Plan 2011-2030.
83

Norway. The government of Norway channels its support through multilateral institutions (UNDP,
UN Women, UNICEF), civil society/NGOs, and the Government of Timor-Leste.
Portugal. Timor-Leste is Portugal’s main beneficiary ODA. Portuguese aid is largely allocated for
education and training, in addition to good governance, participation and democracy, sustainable
development and the fight against poverty, and cluster cooperation.

84

United States

Portugal

Norway

New Zealand

Japan

Germany

EU

Australia

ADB

UN Agencies

World Bank Group

Sectors and subsectors
1. DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIAL CAPITAL
1.1 Health
1.2 Education
1.3 Education and Professional Training
1.4 Social Inclusion
1.5 Environment
1.6 Culture and Heritage
1.7 Media - Diversity and Independence
2. INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
2.1 Roads and Bridges
2.2 Water, Sanitation and Drainage
2.3 Electricity
2.4 Sea ports
2.5 Airports
2.6 Land Transportation
2.7 Telecommunications
2.8 Major project procurement
3. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND JOB
CREATION
3.1 Agriculture
3.2 Petroleum
3.3 Tourism
3.4 Encouraging Jobs Growth
4. CONSOLIDATION OF THE
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
4.1 Economic Policy
4.2 Good Governance in the Public Sector
4.3 Peace, Stability and International Relations

IOM

ILO

FAO.

United States Agency for International Development (USAID). The US Government operates in
Timor-Leste under the terms of the Agreement for Economic and Technical Cooperation between the
Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste dated June 6, 2003. The US Government supports programs in the following areas:
Governing Justly and Democratically, Investing in People (health and higher education), Economic
Growth and the Millennium Challenge Cooperation (which includes activities in anti-corruption and
immunizations). USAID is in the process of drafting a new five year strategy, with intent to focus on
economic growth, good governance, maternal and child health, water and sanitation, higher education,
and global climate change for the duration of its five year strategy.

Annex 8: Standard Country Assistance Strategy Annexes
Standard Annex A2:
Country at a Glance

Timor-Leste at a glance
Key Development Indicators

2/14/13

TimorLeste

East
Asia &
Pacific

Lower
middle
income

Age distribution, 2010

(2011)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

1.2
15
2.9
28

1,962
16,302
0.7
46

2,519
23,579
1.5
39

7,249
3,696
6,657

4,078
1,619
3,632

Female

75- 79
60- 64
45- 49
30- 34

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

3.1
2,730
3,600

15- 19
0-4
10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

10.6
7.5

9.7
8.9

6.9
5.3

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

37
73
62
46
45

14
33
72
20
6

..
..
65
50
25

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

59
43
119
115

96
91
111
112

80
62
110
104

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

69
47

90
66

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2005–2011)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

87
47

1990

1995

2000

Tim or-Lest e

Net Aid Flows

1980

1990

2000

2011

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2010):
Australia
Portugal
Japan

1

0

231

292

0
..
0

0
0
0

82
53
29

124
34
28

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

..
1

..
0

71.6
279

9.2
256

2010

Eas t As ia & Pac ifi c

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15

Long-Term Economic Trends

-20
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

..
..

..
..

-0.3
3.0

3.4
8.9

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

..
..

1.0
..

1.0
..

05

GDP

GDP per c apita

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–11
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

0.6
..

0.7
..

0.8
316

1.2
1,054

2.5
..

1.1
..

3.2
5.6

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

25.8
18.5
2.8
55.7

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

..
..
..

..
..
..

111.7
35.2
25.6

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..
-34.7

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2010.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

85

Timor-Leste
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2011
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

5
242
-289

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

38
12.0

15
286
-269

Voice and accountability
Polit ical stability and
absence of violence

813
77.1

Regulat ory quality
Rule of law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

..

..

Reserves, including gold

..

..

Control of corruption
0

Central Government Finance

2010

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

21.2
..
10.7

124.6
..
19.3

2.7

92.8

2000

25

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

..
..

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
higher values imply better ratings

Source: Worldw ide Governance Indicators (w w w .govindicators.org)

Technology and Infrastructure
Overall surplus/deficit

50

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

..
..

2000

2010
..

2

..
54

..

0.0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)
Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

0
0
–

0
0

0.0
..

0.0

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

..
..

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)

–

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

..
..
..

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

Composition of total external debt, 2010
(data are not available)
Private, 0

IMF, 0
IDA, 0

Short-term, 0

IBRD, 0
Other multilateral, 0

9,250

25
49.9
6.1
7,469

..
0.18

..
0.18

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..

11.8

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

..

58

World Bank Group portfolio

Bilateral, 0

23
57.4
5.1

2000

2010

(US$ millions)

US$ millions

Private Sector Development
Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2011

–
–
–
2000

103
5.0
..
2010

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

0
0
0

0
0
0

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

–
–
–

–
–
–

–

–

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2011 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available. – indicates observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

86

2/14/13

Millennium Development Goals

Timor-Leste

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
Timor-Leste

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990
..
..
..
..

1995
..
..
..
..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

..
..
..

..
..
..

2000
52.9
39.7
6.7
40.6

2010
37.4
49.9
9.0
45.3

..
..

85
65
56
..

..
..

98
..
29

148
112
..

109
86
56

54
46
66

610
24
8

300
29
22

..

..
498
87

34
23

35

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

180
135
..

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

1,000
..
25

880
26
23

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
65.0
..
..
..

52
37
..
..
..
..

54
39
57.4
5.1
0.2
..

69
47
49.9
6.1
0.2
11.8

..
0.0
0.0
..

..
..
..
..

..
..

0.3
53.4
0.2
..

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)
Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

125

498
62

0.0
..

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
60

100

50

100
75

40

75
50

30

50

25

20
25

0

10
2000

2005

2010
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2010

2000

2005

2010

Prim ary net enrollment ratio

Ratio of girls to boy s in primary & sec ondary educ ation

Tim or-Lest e

Eas t As ia & Pac ifi c

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

87

Fix ed + m obi le s ubs cribers

Int ernet users

2/14/13

Standard Annex B2:
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2010

2011

2012

0

6
3.0
50.0
23.0
66.7
51.6
28.7

8
3.1
37.5
8.8
62.5
35.3
27.6

6
3.8
16.7
2.2
50.0
17.6
19.6

0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
20
2
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
9.9
0.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
55.0
50.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
100.0
0.0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

88

Standard Annex B3:
IBRD/IDA Program Summary

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year

2013

2014

Proj ID

US$(M)

TP: Road Climate Resilience Proj - AF

40.0

Sub-Total

40.0

Timor-Leste Coffee Sector Development

7.0

TP Telecomms and ICT Develop Project

7.0

Sub-Total

14.0

Total

54.0

89

Standard Annex B5:
Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2005-11

East
Asia &
Pacific

0.7
2.6
18.6
5.3

0.9
2.8
22.5
6.4

1.2
3.0
28.3
5.5

1,961.6
0.7
45.9
1.8

2,518.7
1.6
39.4
2.9

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..
..

..
..
..

49.9
..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)

..
..

..
..

2,730
139

3,696
131

1,619
140

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

..
..
..

..
..
..

31.9
9.0
41.3

..
..

8.5
..

5.1
..

2.0
3.8

2.0
4.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

85
86
85

93
93
94

85
87
83

..
..
..

52
67
48

69
91
60

90
97
84

87
93
83

..
..
..

..
..
..

66
72
45

95
94
6

80
79
25

42
41
43

51
50
52

62
62
63

72
70
74

65
64
67

159
215

112
148

46
54

20
24

50
69

..
..
..
..

..
..
880
..

259
223
300
29

157
105
89
91

244
175
300
57

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Grow th rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net prim ary school enrollm ent rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an im proved w ater source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Im m unization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Low erm iddleincom e

CAS Annex B5. This table w as produced from the CMU LDB system.
02/14/13
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

90

Standard Annex B6:
Key Economic Indicators

Actual
Indicator
Non-Oil Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry

2007

2008

2010

2011

788.2

875.1

1054

1252

1487

1767

2099

181.0

187.5

..

..

..

..

..

54.7

71.5

85.5

100.9

24.3

32.7

36.8

47.2

52.8

64.1

324.5

439.8

521.6

590.5

105.2

159.1

183.2

210.8

31.7

39.4

44.4

44.8

8.7

11.8

12.7

15.0

75.6

87.2

90.3

101.2

Real Estate Activities
Professional, Scientific, technical, administration and support services

11.8

16.4

18.4

20.5

Public admin, defence, education, human health and social work activitie

84.2

115.2

161.7

187.8

Other services activities
Non-oil value added, GROSS

2015

164.8

20.8

Financial and Insurance Activities

2014

665.0

33.9

Information and Communication

2013

144.6

Manufacturing, Mining, and Quarrying, and other industry

Wholesale and retail trade, Transportation and Storage, Accomodation a

2012

525.2

Construction

Services

Projected

Estimate
2009

7.3

10.7

10.9

10.4

523.8

676.1

788.1

878.9

Plus: Taxes on products

18.8

19.3

30.2

31.9

Less: Subsidies on products

17.4

30.4

30.1

35.7

Total Consumption

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Gross domestic fixed investment

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Government investment

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Private investment

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Exports (GNFS)b

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Imports (GNFS)

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Gross domestic savings

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Gross national savings c

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

1838

3065

2633

3198

4315

4073

4161

..

..

525

665

788

875

1054

1252

1487
2674
..

..

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product (US$ million at current prices)
Non-oil GDP

1313

2400

1845

2323

3261

2821

GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Oil GDP

1850

2900

2250

2730

..

..

..

Petroleum Fund balance (US$ millions)

2086

4197

5377

6904

9338

10923

12297

422

661

681

788

886

872

827

0

0

0

0

0

43

123

11.7

14.6

12.8

9.5

10.6

10.0

10.0

10.3

9.0

0.7

6.8

13.1

8.0

8.0

8.6

7.5

1.7

9.2

13.1

8.0

8.0
1506

Petroleum Fund balance (% of non-oil GDP)
Public debt (US$ millions)
Real Sector
Real non-oil GDP growth
CPI (annual average)
CPI (end-period)
Balance of Payments (US$ )
Current account balance

1177

2023

1363

1538

2375

1773

(in % of GDP)

65

67

52

48

55

44

36

Trade Balance

-169

-297

-376

-374

-666

-795

-861

Exports (GNFS)b

7

14

9

18

22

33

29

..

..

Imports (GNFS)b

176

311

385

392

689

829

890

..

..

Petroleum Revenue

1313

2400

1845

2323

3261

2821

2674

..

39

30

5

46

55

64

147

-20

39

156

-3

160

151

2316

4407

5627

7310

9743

11487

13013

158

170

175

224

170

166

175

FDI ($m)
Overall balance
Public Foreign Assets (end-period)
in months of goods and service imports

(Continued)

91

..

Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Actual
Indicator

2007

2008

Projected

Estimate
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Central government operations (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Revenue
Domestic Revenue
Petroleum Revenue
Expenditure
Recurrent Expenditure
Capital Expenditure

75.4

80.8

72.5

75.2

78.1

54.6

68.1

2.7

1.7

2.5

2.6

2.6

3.3

3.8

72.6

79.1

70.0

72.6

75.6

51.3

64.3

13.5

19.6

23.8

24.8

28.0

43.3

37.0

8.8

13.5

15.4

16.5

13.0

16.7

17.1

..

..

..

..

4.8

6.1

8.4

8.4

15.0

26.6

19.9

Overall Balance

61.9

61.2

48.7

50.4

50.1

11.3

31.1

..

..

Non-oil Overall Balance (in % of non-oil GDP)

-39.6

-85.3

-71.1

-81.1

-113.6

-130.0

-92.8

..

..

a. GDP at
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.

92

Standard Annex B8:
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Closed Projects

22

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

19.70
0.00
12.14
0.00
31.84
0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active)

26.13

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.28

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

26.41

Difference Between

Active Projects
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P092484
P125032
P116520
P106220
P095873
P104794
Overall Result

Planning & Fin Mgt CapacitS
Timor Leste Road Climate RMS
TL Second Chance Educati S
TP - Youth Development PrMS
TP-Education Sector SuppoS
TP-Health Sector Strategic MU

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
S
MS
MS
S
MU

2006
2011
2011
2009
2007
2008

IBRD

IDA

7
20
5
2.118
11
1
46.118

93

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0.123115
17.66024
4.398733
0.113161
3.600375
0.230463
26.12608

-0.30943
2
-0.453181
0.2084204
-1.511865
0.2407558 13.66527
0.1747009 13.66527

124º E

125º E

126º E

127º E

Wetar
Island

I N DO N ES I A
10º N

10º N
Romang
Island

Atauro
Island
Alor
Island

Biquele
Atauro

Berau

t a r
W e

DILI

Laivai

Rantar
Island

DILI
Liquiça

Maubara

Cape
Corimbala

S ea

To
Naikliu

Sakato

Pante Macassar

Citrana

OECUSSI
Nítibe

Passabe

I

Baqui
Bobometo

T

i

m

o

s

Metinaro

Laleia

Bazartete
clo
Railaco
AILEU La MANATUTO
Gleno
Aileu
Ermera
Laclubar
Fatu Beso
Atabae
Letefoho Maubisse Turiscai
Hatolla
Marko
ERMERA Hatobuilico
C
BOBONARO Atsabe Tata Mai Lau Haotio

n
l a Fatolulik

d

Bobonaro
Mape

Tilomar
To
Kuala
Lumpur

Ainaro

AINARO

Same

MANUFAHI

Welaluhu

Manufai

VIQUEQU E
VIQUEQUE

Natarbora

Dilor

Maínal

Baucau
Luro

BAU CAU
BAUCAU

Quelicai

Baguia

Uatolari

Cape Cutchá

Jaco
Island

LAUTÉM
LA UTÉM
Iliomar

Uatucarbau

Ossu

Cape Tei

Mehara Tutuala

Fuiloro
Lospalos

Laga

Cape de Loré

Aliambata

Viqueque
Bé Aco

Cape Deilubún

Cape
Calétec

Beco

9º N

Betano

Suai
127º E

Cape Tafara

Timor

Sea

T IM OR-L EST E

INDON ES I A

MAIN CITIES AND TOWNS
0

0

10

20

10

DISTRICT CAPITALS

30 Kilometers

20

NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS

30 Miles
8

125º E

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

MAIN ROADS
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

126º E

IBRD 33496R

JANUARY 2011

124º E

Com

Lautem

Zumalai Hatoudo

Lolotoe

COVA LIMA

r

(2963 m)

Maliana

Balibo

Bucóli
Vemasse Afagua
Venilale

LIQUIÇAA
LIQUIÇ

iere

Batugade
9º N

DILI

Manatuto

Sah
en

Savu

a i t
S t r

Sei
cal

TIMORLESTE

